Mr. Beagle, good morning.
Good morning. How you going?
I am very well. Hope you are all as well.
We are now. We've got 10 minutes with you,
so hopefully leave some time for the questions. All yours
Have indeed. Thank you.
Good morning. I'm Thomas Beagle.
I'm the chair of the Entity Council for Civil Liberties.
Now, obviously as supporters of civil liberties,
we are concerned of any limits on the right to pro protest,
including protest outside people's homes.
I'm sure you've heard a lot about how important protest,
including protest outside people's homes
has been to our history.
Now, our written submission covers similar territory.
I'm not gonna repeat it here, rather, I want
to cover three elements reasonably quickly,
so this time for questions.
Okay. The first is, I think the bill, the need
for the bill is not clearly established.
It seems to have come about as one of the recommendations
of the IPCA report about the policing of protests are new.
Now, when what PCAs asked law is very a significant business
to research statistics rather, is based on two things.
Firstly, the other countries are doing it,
which seems like a terrible reason
for limiting the rights of people here.
And secondly, and more importantly, it says
that it'll be necessary when there other recommendations
remove the ability to use some of the existing laws.
Police already used to control protest.
And as far as I'm aware at this time,
their other recommendations haven't been picked up yet.
And there is no bill to advance 'em.
In other words, there's no obvious need for this law.
And the people who recommended it say it's only required if
we pass another law that we're currently not passing.
And if there's no justifications of the law, the rest
of the arguments all go away.
It means there's no justification for the limits limit,
for the limitations, our right to protest either.
Now, that brings me to my second point.
The bill represents an attempt to set a new standard for
what is acceptable in protest, both in manner and location.
It pushes the idea that there are entire classes of places
where protest is inappropriate.
It's very easy to see as this could be expanded
by future governments to protect workplaces
or schools or sports ground.
The bill also pushes the idea of unreasonable disruption
as a new standard of behavior
that protests can be expected to adhere to.
Of course, the language in the bill is imprecise
and is ultimately leaving the discretion of deciding
what is unreasonable up
to the police officer who is there at the time.
Now, I'm concerned by both these developments.
They seem to be the first step on
what is possibly a perilous path.
That is the government trying to tell people where
and how they may protest.
That protest should be limited so it doesn't inconvenience
or worry people that probably should be
innocuous and in offensive.
Now, you might count this is just a standard civil
liberties, slippery slope, fearmongering.
Um, but all down this track,
I think the most notable one in the USA quite a few part
of the current were at major political occasions.
They set up special free speech zones distant from the main
event where people who want
to protest can be corralled outta sight.
I think protest is too important
to lock it away and silence it.
And then my third point is that even if the sake
of argument we accept this law is required.
There are problems with how implemented
the bill seems designed not
to stop the undesirable behavior, but to punish people.
And there's two elements I point to for this.
The first being that there is no requirement issue a warning
before arresting and charging people.
There is no, if you keep using a loud Hailey
outside this house at one in
the morning, you'll be arrested.
Surely the point is to stop the
disturbance and isn't a warning.
The best way to do this,
and this is especially true, we can consider the lack
of precision of the language in the bill,
where protestors in police may have very different ideas of
what unreasonable disruption might be in practice.
Enforcement of this law is gonna
depend on police discretion.
And it seems unreasonable that protests have to be able
to read the minds of the police on the scene to avoid arrest
if we're gonna pass a bill.
We strongly believe that a requirement issue
of warning should be added before people can be arrested.
And the second concern is the scale of the penalties.
Three months jail, having a difference of opinion
with a police officer about
what constitutes unreasonable disruption.
It just seems excessive.
Again, if the point of this bill is to solve a problem,
issuing a warning first and following up with arrest
and a fine seems more to take care of it.
Now finally, I want to compare this bill with the law
that set up protest free zones around facilities
that offer abortion services.
It's quite recent a law
that I note we ended up supporting even though it limited
the right to pre protest.
But there were some important differences
and I think there, uh, salient here that law was still,
we could also, that was from getting made.
Law was limited to only if in the country that law
required police to issue a
warning for they could arrest someone.
And finally, that law set the penalties of fine of up
to a thousand dollars with no possibility of jail.
So of those differences in mind, I ask you why is it
that this bill is so outta step of existing law to close?
Protest is an important right.
In New Zealand, this bill imposes
significant limitations on it.
We don't believe the need for the bill
and the limitations, uh,
on our civil liberties have been justified.
If you do decide to proceed of it, we strongly encourage you
to clarify the language used, insist
that arrests can only happen after warnings issue
and the penalty be reduced to a fine
with no possibility of jail time.
Thank you for your time. I'm happy to answer some questions.
Right. Hey, thank you.
Very succinct and very, um, good submission. Right.
Any members questions? Oh, right. Uh, Ms. Walters,
Uh, thank you very much for your submission.
And I did just want to say, which I don't ordinarily,
but for people listening in, yours is a very good submission
to read in terms of getting a comprehensive view
of the issues and the problems with this bill.
Um, I was just wondering whether you could speak
to some points that you raised on the difference
between these proposed that were made. Um,
I think we covered the main ones.
I mean, that was an interesting bill
because we, I mean, we had a lot of internal debate about it
because it was limiting the right to protest
and we're very concerned about that.
On the other hand, like I said, we said,
thought it was a real problem.
We were seeing people being denied medical care
because of protesters outside places.
So there was a real harm there.
And we also saw the limitations imposed seemed reasonable.
They seemed aimed.
They weren't creating huge areas across the country where,
where protest was, uh, limited.
They had, the areas had to be approved by a, uh, regulation.
I, I believe order and council, I think it was, um, they,
and because it seemed to be aimed at stopping the behavior,
I think that's one of the key points we raised here,
that people, the police had to issue a warning.
You could still protest silently and,
and the penalty was such, it was just an arrest and a fine.
And I think the difference with this bill is that seems
to be not so much, it seems to aim at punishing people
and this whole idea that you can just go and arrest people
and that you can, that is partly you can arrest people later
rather than say, rather than trying to stop their behavior.
That's an attempt to punish.
Thank you. Very good. Anyone else? Oh, um, Dr. Nan.
Thank you. Um, thank you for that submission.
Uh, can I just, just further on from what, uh,
Venicia Walters is asking for,
and I guess a lot of the, I guess the counter argument
for something like this is how it would mean
for the residents
and, you know, you raise up the idea of the contraception,
sterilization of abortion safety areas
and how that would be for people who are in those areas,
sort of, I guess, uh, getting an abortion.
So from your perspective, two questions.
The first one is, um, what would,
what then would be the perspective from the
residents and the end?
The second question is around, uh,
I think paragraph, let me just quickly check.
Um, paragraph mentioned of, um, will, uh,
against I wanted view,
if you have any thought on that particular report.
Okay. So the first question about the, um,
the residents around the areas.
I mean, we have a large number of disruptions to our lives
as residents wherever we live
and residents are thrown across the country, of course.
'cause, you know, we live across the kind country.
Um, I'm generally reluctant to say that
residents have a complete right to peace
and quiet in the same way
that we set limits around these things.
In the same way we set noise control limits.
You know, there are, there are recognitions
that noise is acceptable to maybe about 10 o'clock
and everyone sort of agrees at
that point it should be a bit quieter.
Um, and I don't really see the protest as that different.
I mean, we've recently,
recently seen noise control limitations used to, um, stop a,
a protest outside a or to, to quiet a protest
outside a politician's home in Auckland.
Mm-hmm. Um, um, residents have rights,
but I think protestors have rights as well.
I think that's probably the best way to look at that.
And we are talking about balancing those rights
and I think this bill's going too far in one direction.
Hey, thank you Mr. Beagle. Hey you for that.
Very succinct congratulate you on this. Thanks Thomas.
Thank you very much. Thank you.
Right now we've got, um, Ms. Campbell who I saw by Zoom,
Ms. Campbell.
Good morning Kia.
How's it going? Very good.
Now we've got five minutes with you. Thank you.
That's cool. Okay. Uh,
uh, let me just get started.
Uh, uh, called awa called Nawi,
nor called Ku Naughty
called, um, my name is Kelly.
I'm not an academic or expert.
Uh, Thomas obviously, you know, went through the whole, uh,
bell and, uh, you know, sort of mentioned all the sort of,
uh, issues that's, uh, within it.
So I'm not really gonna do that.
I'm more sort of coming from a personal perspective
and talking on behalf of, um,
the communities that I work with.
So I don't usually put myself, so to speak,
this what's happening, feel compelled
to use my voice about the answers of the world,
but issues that are happening, uh, uh, country as well.
So, so I'm coming here as a concerned citizen
and on top of, uh, that by profession I'm a social worker
and I currently work the former refugee community.
Um, I've written other submissions
before, um, in regards to like the fast track bill
and the regulatory standards bill
and, uh, the treaty principles bill as well.
I probably didn't spend too much time with this.
I just put in something really quickly
because again, I felt pretty compelled on this idea of, uh,
suppressing, um, free speech.
That that's how I, I, that's how I see it.
I sort of see it as a, like a bigger picture issue than sort
of a technicality around, you know, protesting
and, uh, residential premises I see as, as a bigger issue.
Um, so yeah, so as a social worker
and a community person as well, I'm involved in a lot
of different community mahi.
I can see firsthand the impact this
government's decision making.
And I'm even speaking, uh, more than this particular bell.
Um, the decision making that, um,
that this is having on our most vulnerable,
but also my Kai Mahi that I work with my friends
who in professions such as nursing support workers,
teachers, the public service sector, we all know
that there's a lot of, uh, strikes
that are happening at this at the moment.
Um, so I pose the spark
'cause I'm passionate about the right to free speech.
And I believe that, uh, New Zealand has always been seen
as a democracy, and part
of this is the right to freedom of speech.
People have been led to believe that this is a fair, fair
and just society, and that we have the right
to speak up when we believe something isn't right.
And that's all international issues as well.
However, case will all to for free speech
and for our history, you know,
haven't ob obtained our test or action.
The government hasn't, hasn't just given us our rights.
So, you know, in a historical example
is the eight hour workday.
This had to be fought for, led by Samuel Parnell.
Back then the government of the day wanted us
to work 16 plus hour days, six to seven days a week.
So I say these sorts of things because throughout history,
and currently what's happening is that the people have had
to like, speak up and actually demand
the right step we all deserve.
And so currently, as I mentioned, there's a lot
of protesting happening as a response
to this current government's decision making,
protesting on global issues such as anti genocide,
pro workers rights are the backbone of our society.
Women's rights such as pay equity, t rights,
the working class, the poor, um, it's in the majority
that the protests are nonviolent and by passive resistance.
I've been involved in a lot
of protests in particular over the last two years.
And this is what I've, I've witnessed myself
and I've been part of many of those protests as well.
And it's full of people from all walks of life
and backgrounds who just care about humanity
and what's best for the community.
And I know you mentioned about the residents.
Well, generally the residents I've found are being really
supportive of the different protests and actions.
And I think that many have actually seen this as,
um, as a positive.
Like we're speaking for the residents.
You know, it's not that it's it's against the residents or,
or even the workers when we're doing protests about like,
boycotting, um, we always have conversations with unions
and workers and for them to understand
that it's not about them.
You know, we're, we're protesting against corporations
about, you know, government, you know, just
as not the people who part of the protest, people
who passionate communities for everyone, people who,
you know, pe these people don't want to have
to strike a protest.
And I know all the general strikes that are happening, um,
at the moment in regards to like pay equity,
working conditions.
The majority of those people,
they're like our everyday people.
They are our residents
and they don't want to be out there protest.
They prefer to continue to do the work that they love to do
and care about the communities that they work with.
However, this government is making it seem that protesters
and activists are criminals.
And that's what I say this Bell is trying to do is like,
you know, okay, the previous speaker has said, well,
is that 45 minutes?
Yeah, it is, unfortunately. Oh, okay. Oh, okay.
Hey, you were just getting started, but they'll come.
I wanna congratulate you for taking the time.
As you said, you, you haven't done this
normally, but thank you.
And that's part of democracy.
So thank you for coming in from TGA Bay. Um, oh,
No, I'm not from TGA Bay.
I am, I actually live in Puy, but that's a small All right.
Okay. Where my hanau from?
Yeah. All right. Hey, fantastic. Hey, thank you.
And thank you for contribution
this morning. Cheers, mate. No,
No, all good. Okay, bye. Thank
you. Cheers.
Right now we've got Mr. Williams coming in by Zoom,
Mr. Williams here, there.
Aye. Good morning
Williams.
Uh, I'm here this morning to oppose the summary offenses,
demonstrations near residential premises, uh, ment Bill.
I was raised in a whanau where protest was part
of life from a young age.
I marched against the Vietnam War, stood
for a nuclear free Pacific
and old opposed apartheid in sport,
and joined the Maori land march.
And the occupation of Bastion Point.
Uh, these weren't just protests,
they were acts of conscience.
They were how ordinary people, how power to account
and shape the future of this country.
More recently, I've stood with UA and Tata t
and Hoki against gold mining.
And I intend to keep doing so
because what's happening now under this,
under the radar is a surge of mining applications
by overseas and com companies enabled
by recent legislative changes.
Uh, these companies are targeting UA that have, uh,
that Maori have fought for, lived on
and protected for generations.
This bill would make it easier to silence that resistance.
Let's be clear, this legislation is not about
protecting people from harm.
It's about protecting power from discomfort.
It criminalizes peaceful protest.
It gives police sweeping discretion
to arrest without warning.
It uses vague language like unreasonable disruption
without defining what that means.
And it does all this under the guise of public order,
but the cost is enormous.
First at risks breaching to, uh, article two
guarantees Maori authority over their lands, villages,
and TGA protest is one
of the few tools Maori have consistently used to assert
that authority, especially when the crown fails
to uphold its obligations.
This bill makes no attempt to protect protest
as an expression of Tonga.
That's a serious submission.
It undermines the crown's duty
to actively protect Maori rights.
Second, it's unnecessary.
We already have laws to deal
with threatening obstructive behavior.
The Ministry of Justice's own regulatory impact statement
admits this bill may capture conduct not traditionally
subject to criminal sanction.
That includes peaceful protest outside parliament,
premise premier health,
or embassies, places where protest has long been part
of our democratic fabric.
Thirdly, it opens a door to arbitrary enforcement.
We know from experience
that vague laws are not applied equally.
They're used disproportionately against ua,
against climate activists, against those
who challenge the status quo.
This bill would only deepen that injustice.
Fourth, it sets a dangerous precedent if we allow protests
to be criminalized near homes today.
What's next? Workplaces, schools marae.
Once the principal is broken,
that protest is a right, not a privilege.
It becomes easier to chip away at it piece by piece.
And finally, this bill will have a chilling effect.
People will think twice before speaking out.
They'll stay home instead of showing up.
And that silence will not be a sign of peace.
It'll be a sign of fear
and we cannot afford that has a proud history of protests.
It's how we became nuclear free.
It's how we stopped the Springbok tour.
It's how we upheld the treaty when
governments have failed too.
Protest is not the problem. It's part of the solution.
So I urge you today to reject the spill, not just
because it's vague, not just because it's unnecessary, but
because it strikes at the heart of
who we are as a democracy.
I mean, that's me. Thank you.
Hey, well, thank you Mr. Williams.
Um, that's a very eloquent, um, submission that you've made.
Uh, we, we are out of time, unfortunately,
but I thank you for your contribution this morning.
Thank you for your time too. Truth.
Right now we've got, um, Ms.
Call at, um, Ellenberg by Zoom.
We don't have him. We don't have him.
Have you got, um, the next person? Neil? Neil Gordon.
Right. We're gonna have Neil Gordon.
Mr. Gordon, are you there?
Kiara? Good morning.
And thank you for being flexible about the timing.
Hey, now we've got five minutes with you.
So for yours, as it said.
Okay, Kiara Koto, um, the right to assembly
to gather in public spaces and exercise.
Freedom of speech is part of our democracy.
We should treasure. Getting out
and speaking up in the real world is something we should
celebrate and protect, particularly in a digital age
of furious, spurious, online typing,
getting out in the street or, or whatever.
And having your say is way more healthy than
typing away alone.
Online. Kiwis don't get out
in the street readily.
It's not the kind of public display we are big on.
So when it, when it does happen,
it's significant, it's important.
And out of the ordinary people should be surprised
or perhaps affronted.
You know, that's kind of the point.
Wherever that is, the main is point.
Whether it's a public square, a park, a street, a city
or residential street, it makes no difference.
They're public spaces. The existing laws
cover the situation.
In the unlikely event, things get outta hand.
But that doesn't happen much, does it?
A protest has various functions, um,
and I've heard other speakers out outline, um,
great, great points.
But look, one of them, um, is catharsis.
Um, allowing the release of strong emotions.
If you suppress
or restrict protest,
those strong feelings, they don't go away.
They get bottled up and they will out some other way.
It's entirely sensible.
It's healthy for everyone to allow people to vent.
Um, you run the same risk if you set up a,
a consultation process
and ignore what people have to say like you've done
with the regulatory standards bill.
If you shut down
or you neuter democratic means for people
to have their voice heard,
you're inviting a more radical response.
And so that's why I say the right
to protest should be protected
and enhanced, not chipped away at.
That's why I you should I say, you should reject this bill
because we should encourage people to speak up,
encourage people to express dissent or, or whatever.
It's a sign of a healthy society.
Uh, and so that's all I wanted to say.
I'm happy to answer any questions.
Right. Thank you very much for that.
Um, any questions, members?
Yeah, uh, Neil, uh, Jamie, I just wondering, you,
you mentioned about a, a protest outside,
a residential dwelling that you took part in.
Yep. Can you just explain to me why that was effective doing
that at that residence?
Uh, what, what happened there was, that was July, 2023.
Um, and there were public meetings
at a residential address in Havelock North
that were organized by a, an out
and proud white supremacist.
Um, someone who had publicly railed against the mixing
of races and, um, you know,
online goes out, evil people.
Um, so, um, that person, um,
organized meetings, um, in Hawke's Bay for Julian Bachelor.
And so, um, uh, and those meetings, um,
'cause they couldn't find a, a, a church
or a business that would host them,
they ended up being in a, in a residential street.
So we stood outside
and there was singing, there was a guitar, there was a bit
of dancing, and we made our point very,
very peacefully in the street.
We didn't go into private property.
Um, but the point was made that hate speech,
um, was not welcome and our community
That, yeah.
Yes. Yeah. Very good. Um, Ms. Nala, just last question. Yep.
So does that mean, um, that, that when you,
when you engaged in that purchase,
the example you gave mm-hmm.
Was it targeted at someone in a specific residence?
There was, it was, you know,
there was a group meeting there. It was a,
So those other, sorry to interrupt you sir.
'cause of time. So those other people organized the meeting
in a residential street and you protested that.
Yep. Yes.
Is that what, okay, so the, the, the new offense, we wanna,
um, we wanna enact says
that it's directed at any regular occupant
of those premises.
So in your example, I can't see
that you guys were directing it at a regular ocu
occupant of those premises.
So the law wouldn't apply
to the example you gave. Thank you.
Alright. Thank you very much Mr. Gordon,
for your contribution this morning.
Right now, I think we've got, excuse me, my voice, uh, Mrs.
There available. Can you hear us?
Yes. Morning. Good, good
Morning. Uh, we've got, uh,
five minutes with you
From Tara Committee.
Um, I'm speaking in opposition to the bill, uh,
as it stands, um, I haven't had the time to look at, uh,
some of the other, um, submissions made,
but I'm sure there'll be excellent missions.
And the only one to is piece, section and start there.
And myself was maybe 20 years a younger
and activist in Wellington.
Uh, and picking up the quarter from the previous submitters,
uh, I myself was involved at protest actions, um, outside,
uh, what will be residential homes.
Um, I'll start with, um, embassies.
And we've had numerous protests over the years at, um,
various embassies in Wellington, uh, raising awareness
around issues that we felt, um, deeply about
where there was repression, uh, in other countries
where there was around, uh, that were happening overseas.
Um, so we would've organized protest outside embassies.
Um, the way I see, um, the legislation, it's not clear to me
that those will be made illegal, um, under, under,
under the, uh, the proposed legislation.
Uh, second one I'd like to pick up is, um, in about 2005,
2006, you may recall, uh,
the New Zealand Defense Industry Association used
to have annual meetings at that time at TE Papa.
Uh, that's when we started a campaign against the
New Zealand defense industry.
Uh, we were disagreed with the fact
that companies should be profiting from war,
and we felt it was appropriate to, in fact, have a protest
outside the organizer, uh,
of the New Zealand Defense Industry Association Conference,
who was living in Brooklyn and Wellington.
Um, at the, the protest itself was very creative in
that we dressed up as clowns.
Uh, we were part of
what we called the Revolutionary Clown Army.
So it was a theatrical protest,
but it in fact was outside, uh, the gentleman's house.
I can't re remember his name.
Uh, and we had a protest outside that was,
it was completely peaceful.
Uh, we were clowning around, uh,
but made a point that, um, that we disagreed with the fact
that, um, and we wanted the neighborhood to know that, um,
their neighbor was in fact profiting from war
and involved in organizing, um, a forum
by an association that was profiting from,
from manufacturing weapons
and components of, of weapons
that were killing people in wars across the world.
So those are real life examples of us as activists, um,
that are relevant.
Uh, I disagree with you guys, um, when you want to, um, um,
attack the Bill of Rights
and our rights granted within the Bill of Rights
around freedom of association and, and,
and to express our views freely,
I think this bill goes way too far.
You have provisions already, such as breach of the peace
or disorderly behavior to deal with incident, um, that are,
that may arise from protest activity.
Uh, by and large, um, the protests
outside these residences are, are, are lawful, are peaceful,
uh, and I don't see why you would want to, um,
have a repressive approach, uh, in legislating against, um,
what is, uh, part of a very healthy democracy, uh,
to raise our opinions, raise our voices, and,
and disagree with policy, uh,
and disagree with the actions of people who, for example,
organize, um, a forum that profits from more.
So those are my words for you this morning.
Uh, I encourage you to abandon this bill. Um, so
Thank you very much, um, members, any questions?
Alright. Hey, fantastic. Thank you.
Um, enjoy Taranaki, it looks fantastic day.
All right, cool. Right now we've got, um,
we've got New Zealand Council of Trade Unions.
Are they next? Right.
Alright, think we've got, oh, good morning. There you are.
Good morning. Good morning. We've got 10 minutes with you.
Um, so I'll let you introduce yourselves
and then, um, obviously leaves a bit of time for questions.
Thank you, Moderna.
Um, members of the Select committee, uh,
my name's Melissa an Bridges, I'm the Secretary
of the New Zealand Council of Trade Unions to Mahi,
and I'm joined by our legal advisor, Gaal Alda.
I'll give a quick introduction
and then hand over to Gaal to give us, um,
a bit more detail about our position on this legislation.
So the New Zealand Council
of Trade Unions is the largest democratic
organization in the country.
We represent over 340,000 union members collectively across
our affiliated unions.
Uh, we reject this bill and its purpose
and would encourage the committee to, um,
also oppose this legislation.
We believe that protest is an essential component
of any democracy.
Democratic values is something
that the New Zealand Union movement, um,
union movements internationally, and we believe New Zealand
and New Zealanders, um, hold dearly
and is central to our identity as a nation.
This legislation is an unnecessary restriction on this.
We also find that it is deeply concerning the, uh, direction
that this legislation is traveling in, given the rise
of authoritarianism globally
and also of au authoritarian government attitudes
towards dissent.
And for those, um, principles, uh, we would encourage the,
um, the select committee to oppose this legislation.
I'll hand over now to Gael to give a bit more detail about,
um, some aspects of our opposition to this legislation.
Thank you. Uh, Koto, uh, select committee.
Uh, the committee has a copy of, uh,
written submission at hand.
So accordingly, uh, we will not go into a great deal
of detail, um, on those representations.
However, we do see fit to make a few comments on this bill
and the threat that it poses to the fundamental rights
and civil liberties that we all hold.
Um, firstly, the CTU utterly rejects the suggestion made
by the supporters of this bill that is designed
to protect the right, uh, to privacy,
and that it is consistent with Article 17
of the International Covenant of Civil and Political Rights.
This bill adds nothing to the protection of personal liberty
privacy or the protection
of property from unlawful interference.
What this bill does is take away rights to protest that are
currently protected by both international
and domestic law, by making actions
that are currently well within the scope of lawful protest,
criminal punishable and imprisonable.
Um, this does not clarify rights to privacy.
Uh, this is a bill to strip away rights, uh, not a bill
to clarify what what rights already exist.
So I think that should be, uh, at the forefront of any, uh,
honest discussion about what this bill represents.
Um, the right to peacefully protest, as we have said, uh,
repeatedly is a fundamental democratic right.
It is a legitimate vehicle of democratic participation,
and it is subject to clear limitations
that are justifiable within a free and democratic society.
Wherever the right to engage in peaceful protest impacts on
other rights, such as the right to possess
or occupy property,
or the right to privacy, the law is capable
and does balance different rights in order to ensure
that all rights are upheld.
A protest is a disruptive event.
It can cause annoyance, irritation,
and degrees of displeasure.
It is an act of public rejection
or disagreement, and it can be targeted.
It is, it's disruptive qualities.
What defines an action as a protest
and makes it effective, mere annoyance
and disruption is not sufficient
as a threshold for canceling this.
Right. And this has been well established in, uh,
legal discussions
and in case law, the right to protests like any other,
right, that is, um, sorry, the right
to protest like another right
that this government does not support.
The right to strike is not a simply a symbolic action.
People who engage in legitimate
and peaceful protests have a right for their protest action
to be affected within the confines of what is peaceful.
There may be and have been times when issues arise,
when questions about the scope of the right
to protest are raised.
But real democracy often involves
resolving difficult questions.
This bill adds nothing to those debates.
And so we ask what is the real reason for this bill?
Well, we think that the, uh,
re regulatory impact statement attached
to the bill has some very telling statements.
It admits that there's very little evidence
to justify a need for restriction.
Uh, protests in New Zealand are largely peaceful
and generally do not cross, cross a threshold that, uh,
set in a free, uh, democratic society.
It also notes that there is an increase in protest activity
and, uh, what it describes, uh, loosely
as a trend whereby the homes of, uh,
government figures are targeted.
Uh, this we say is the real reason of the bill.
Uh, what is missed in the anecdotal evidence used
to justify the bill is the concurrent trend on the part
of this government to shut people out
of democratic processes
that in the past have been taken for granted.
Once it was a convention for the government to consult
with the people it governed
through tripartite forums and select committees.
Now we see that such consultation is increasingly subject
to the government's wins.
This government has touted some severely divisive policies,
uh, that have and will impact the lives of all, uh,
its ity politics
and its attacks on employment rights reveal the government's
commitment to serving the interests of the powerful,
of the interests of the masses.
Um, some enormous decisions have been made without any
consultations such as the repeal of FPAs
or, um, even in complete secrecy, such as the decision
to scrap effective pay equity systems against this trend.
The right to show displeasure against the government's
policies is all the more important than indispensable.
This bill, if passed, will not quell dissent.
It will merely illustrate another example
of the government's willingness to scrap rights instead
of engaging with us democratically.
Thank you. Who will take any questions you might have.
Alright. Thank you for your submission, um, members.
Yep. Um, Ms. Walters,
Uh, thank you very much for your submission.
We've had a few submitters speak about the chilling effect
that this bill would have.
Um, what would be your response to someone who might say,
well, those people should just attend the protest
and then challenge the legality
of any action taken against them.
What that, what would that actually mean
for union members, for example?
Well, it would mean that, uh,
they may be involved in very costly processes, um, going
to court, uh, defending themselves
when this should be framed as a right.
That's accessible to all.
The presumption should be that you can protest within the,
the scope of what's allowed in a peaceful, um,
and democratic society.
Um, the, the commentary on this,
the International Law commentary on this, is
that you may have restrictions,
but they must be precise not to make it impossible for you
to exercise the right, because there are so many loopholes,
but so that the right is not, uh, restricted beyond
what is absolutely necessary.
So I think to frame it that, you know,
you can expose yourself to liability
and then defend yourself afterwards,
actually undermines the, the, the,
the substance of the right a great deal.
And if I can just add to that,
it will undoubtedly have a chilling effect on people who,
um, might feel strongly about an issue.
But not everyone, you know, loves going to protests, right?
They do it because they feel that it is an important issue,
it's something that they should do.
But those people who might be feeling uncertain,
it will undoubtedly have a chilling effect on their
participation in that democratic process.
Okay. I've got a question from Mr. Stevenson.
Hi, good morning. Um, how often does the CTU protest
outside residential houses?
Uh, I, in the six years that I've been secretary
of the CTU, I can think of maybe two
or three occasions where we have protested
outside an embassy.
So if that's considered within the scope,
and it was on a, on a residential street.
An example of that is protesting outside, um,
the embassy of the Philippines, for example, when, um,
union leaders in the Philippines were being murdered, um,
were being red tagged, arrested, um, on trumped up charges
and murdered for their participation in, um,
democratic trade unions in the Philippines.
And we stood in solidarity
and protested, um, for sort
of a half hour at lunchtime on a couple of occasions.
So very, very infrequently.
Um, it's not a main, um, strategy,
but it is an important one, um, in some specific situations
that still should not be limited.
Right. But never outside.
I mean, an embassy totally get that,
and that takes sounds totally legitimate,
but in your experience in the last three years, never
outside what we would consider a private residence of a,
of a public official. Mm-hmm.
So speaking specifically about protests
that the CTU has organized?
Yeah, no. Okay. Thank you.
We're more likely to go to a large, um, uh, place with,
you know, the kinds of numbers that we're likely to get.
Thank you. All right.
Thank you very much and thank you for your
contribution this morning to both of you.
Alright. Uh, right now we're on to, um,
uh, rich, please.
Um, oh, Mr. Noble, you were gonna come on by, uh,
the zoom, but you're here.
Fantastic. No, that's, uh, no, I wasn't, I wasn't,
that's why I'd be down by, I'm so glad you're here.
Head man era and much more effective being here in the room.
So we've got five minutes with you. Thank you.
Uh, and if I may allow myself for cheeky, uh,
van come to Manushi Walters.
I'm s here my concerning this bill
of protests outside Dipples
that include residential premises for their staff.
I'm part of the group that has gar gathered
every Wednesday, sadly, uh, for almost four years now
outside the Russian embassy here in Wellington in protest
against the invasion of Ukraine.
And you're going to also hear from, uh,
our convener Sharon Alban shortly.
So we plant our flags, uh, sing chalk on the driveway.
The diplomatic, uh, dignitary protection service
of the police are very familiar with us
and have told us a number of times.
They don't really have any concerns about us.
But there are staff members
who reside on the embassy compound.
Here is a public photo
and there's a family with a young child
who live in this apartment here.
And my concern is that this bill
of passed into law would provide the pretext
for the Russian Embassy to seek,
to have our protests ended on the grounds that,
in particular, the child living there should not be
subjected to our presence and
therefore we were disrupting the, their enjoyment
of the premises and also on a private capacity.
So, can I, sorry, Mr, can I just ask, that apartment was
inside the embassy or in inside the embassy compound?
Yes. Oh, so it's not a separate Yeah, of course. Yeah. Okay.
So, and, and that I understand it's covered under the re
of the bill, so that's important to know that.
Yes. And, uh, uh, also privately,
most weeks I spend some time outside the Iranian embassy,
uh, which is on a residential street
and in Thai, in solidarity
with the woman life freedom movement.
Um, and with the blessing
of the Iranian dissident community here in Poche, many
of whom feel that if they protest outside the embassy,
this might put relatives back in Iran at
risk from the regime.
So they've expressed their gratitude that I'm willing
to be a witness on their behalf.
I'd park up over the road with, uh, with banners on my car.
And also, uh, you can see hanging up there these images
of Iranians who lost their eyes to rubber bullets
as a result of what would seem to have been, uh,
an intentional practice by an instances two piece to cause
is that at least we live on comes while I'm there.
Uh, a mother and daughter or so I assume leave the premises.
And I'm positioned in such a way
that they can't avoid seeing me.
I think it's really important that they are confronted
with the horrific reality of
what the Ira Iranian regime is doing to its own people.
But once again, I fear that this bill
of past would give the pretext for the embassy, uh, at least
to try and stop me displaying these images on the grounds
that they are unsettling to the mother and and daughter.
They say, well, look, you know,
this little girl shouldn't happen to be looking at this.
And that's disruptive to their enjoyment of the premises.
Iran and Russia are brutal repressive regimes that don't
tolerate descent.
I'm only too aware that if me
and my fellow protesters were, they're not here, we would,
um, be in prison or worse.
So do we want to be passing laws that play into their hands
by silencing criticism of them here?
And may I conclude by honoring the New Zealand civilians of,
uh, victims of Russian aggression in Ukraine, Rob Alien
and Mary Mankey, who were killed when MH 17 was shot down.
And the humanitarian aid worker, Andrew Bag Shore.
Thank you. Well, thank you very much Mr. Nova.
I'm so glad you did come and do some thank you.
Uh, much more effective now. Members. Any questions for Mr.
Nova? Not very clear. Yeah. Thank you. Thank you very much.
Thank you. Appreciate.
And I've got, okay, now who have you got?
Charlotte. Charlotte. And we've got Charlotte Evans,
hopefully
Charlotte, if you're there, um, we're ready for you.
Sorry, the phone interface is a bit tricky.
Uh, can you hear me?
Yes, we, we can hear you hopefully. Great, great,
Great. Okay, I'll
I'll begin then.
Um, so there was no good reason to pass this bill.
Uh, there would only cover the circumstances
where other criminal law already applies,
in which case it's just pointless
or it criminalizes certain actions if
and only if they're part of a political demonstration.
Since it's obvious that the bill
that does nothing, shouldn't pass.
I'll just be speaking to the latter case here.
Uh, it would be extraordinarily regressive to make a law
that specifically criminalizes protest
and which provides for discrimination on
the ground of political opinion.
This bill would do that. And such an abhorrent law has
no place in the modern democracy.
Uh, this is shown by the fact
that this bill would be at odds with Human Rights Act,
the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act,
and the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights.
Uh, also in the context of the electoral amendment bill.
Also before this committee, uh,
it also constitutes an attack on electoral rights by way
of the three month prison sentence
provided for in the proposed section five B subsection two.
And, uh, speaking now as a queer person,
collectively we've been the target of a lot of protests,
some of it quite vitriolic, as well
as outright political violence, uh,
organized political violence like the attack at
the library earlier this year.
So where one of the groups
that has a big stake in issues like this,
both from the point of view of having had to fight
for our rights and also from having been targeted
with some really nasty stuff.
Uh, and I don't believe for a second
that this bill has our best interest at heart.
I also think it's pretty tasteless at this time.
This bill is introduced
as more concerned about nonviolent protests than it is
with violent attacks on our community
and on the people who stand up for us.
So of all that in mind, I don't support any proposed
legislation that threatens
to undermine the right to protest.
I think we still also represents a lack of understanding.
Sorry.
No, sorry, I thought you'd finished but carry on.
Carry on my mistake.
No, I was just, I was just pausing for a second.
Um, uh, I think this bill also represents a lack
of understanding of the importance
of vigorous legal protection of political freedoms.
Uh, it's actually a lot like vaccines in a way.
We live in a country without polio,
in a world without smallpox, that technology has been
so remarkably successful that we're in danger
of forgetting just how bad things actually
were before we had that.
And it's the same with political freedoms.
History has shown a shift from violent
to non-violent protest comes about when the law is
vigorously in favor of the right to protest
because the law protects the right to protest.
We live in a country where a protest might involve making a
bunch of noise outside the boss's house,
and we're starting to forget that in the past
it would've involved dragging her out into
the street to rough him up.
Uh, because the law protects the right to protest,
we get protests that carried out
with placards and noise makers.
We should not start down this track.
It was subverting those back
to flaming torches and pitchforks.
So I urged the committee to reject the bill. Um, yeah.
Alright. Finished. Um, so,
Okay. Good.
Hey, thank you Ms. Evans.
Um, thank you for that contribution this morning. Thank you.
Right. Members, any questions for Ms. Evans? No, very clear.
Hey, thank you. Um, just again, um, great
that you've made it
and that's all part of our democratic process,
so appreciate that. Have a good morning.
Thank you. Right now we've got, uh, she
who I think Mr. Noble filters.
Um, is she
okay,
Kiara?
Good morning. Ah, good. So shall I go?
Yes, we've got five minutes with you.
Good. Well, I'll start by greeting you Tina Koto, uh,
through I'm opposed to this bill
because protest is an integral part
of any well-functioning democratic society.
We are a proud protesting nation as most of us in
see our democracy as a Tonga that needs to be protected,
guarded, and nurtured.
Anything that threatens our democracy like this bill will
be protested against.
And any international social justice issue
that is Beaumont will be protested against.
And this is good. It shows the kind, caring,
and compassionate nature of Kiwis.
No need to be fearful.
Our protests, by
and large are peaceful protestors, know their
responsibilities and police know theirs.
There have been no riots, the likes of which we have seen
overseas protesting outside personal
residences has been part
of protesting here in Al Theo for a long time.
According to the RIS for this bill, very few people do it
and little trouble has been caused.
However, it did state there was a peak last year in 2024.
And I think it's a safe assumption to make
that the peak was due to the introduction
of the treaties principle bill, the racist
and divisive bill
that you introduced based on ideology rather than on the
crown commitment to Maori as outlined in Titi,
the protest would've been outside government MPS homes,
and I suspect you did not like them.
So instead of realizing that this would be a consequence
of the introduction of the TPB, you blame the protestors
and are now setting out to stop us.
The current laws we have could have legally allowed the
police to remove protestors if need be, breach of the peace,
disorderly behavior and so on.
Politicians must expect people to challenge their actions.
This is good and it is democracy.
We protest because we're angry and
or passionate about things
and protesting list lets off our steam.
To put a lid on that steam as this bill would do, means
that the steam would've to come out in other ways.
And definitions of this bill are difficult.
It cast the residential premises definition very wide.
I alluded to this in my written submission
regarding our community
and the increase in liquor stores under this bill.
Where would we protest outer Sta for the invasion
of Ukraine by Russia?
As Richard said, every Wednesday since the invasion, a group
of us have stood outside the Russian Embassy
to let them know our horran for their actions
where on public land.
And the Russians hate us being there,
and I suspect will be rubbing their hands
with glee at this piece of legislation.
They often call the police who come and talk to us
and decide nothing to see here and go.
The head of the DPS told us when he visited
that he had never seen such a peaceful protest.
When the police stopped coming so regularly,
the Russian hi Russians hired a security guard so unused
to protests that they are, we do no harm.
However, as staff live at this embassy, we would have
to leave our protest venue.
And where would we go? The Russians need to know that
is against this war.
And disruption is a perspective in comparison
to the Russian response to our protest.
Some years ago when the French were engaged in nuclear
testing in the Pacific, a group of us protested
outside the French Embassy.
And on a few occasions we stayed overnight.
On some mornings when we awoke, we were greeted with a plate
of freshly baked ants, compliments of the French embassy.
The French know about the importance of protesting.
They didn't see us as disruptive.
Let's not be like the Russians with prisons full
of political prisoners.
Let's continue with our successful,
mainly peaceful approach to protesting.
Don't give people any more reason to get angry
and disgruntled because that is when the violence begins,
the steam has to go somewhere.
So drop this pity in unnecessarily but not unnecessary.
Bill in the rubbish bin, never to be seen again.
Face the consequences of implementing laws
that do not please most of us here in our beautiful country.
If that consequence is people protesting
outside your home, it is karma.
Thank you.
Fantastic. Thank you very much. Right members? Yeah.
I've got a question from Mr. Bates.
Thanks chair, and thanks for your submission.
You make the comment that if it results in protests
where most of New Zealanders disagree with something,
we end up with protests outside of our home.
That, that doesn't make any sense to me
because a lot of the protests, uh, can often be for someone
or a group of people who have a, a, a view shared
by a minority, but they dislike a particular, um, action
or opinion or piece of legislation and therefore protest.
So the, the, it sounds like you'd be uncomfortable if there
was a limit on protests only where it could be proven
that a majority of New Zealanders agree with the protesters.
Ah, no, I'm sorry if I gave you that, uh, opinion.
That's not the opinion I was trying to convey.
I think we as, um, a country need to, um,
be free to protest and if that protest takes us outside
somebody's home, so be it.
And I think that the relationship to
that and my point about the treaty principals bill is where
that came, comes from.
Mm, that majority.
Okay. Thank you for clarifying that. Alright.
Thank you for your contribution this morning.
Um, and uh, we do this. Okay.
Kia Kiara, now we've got,
um, Mr. Hunter.
Thank you. Thanks coming. Um, have we got Mr. Hunter? No.
Okay. Yeah, Emma. Okay, let's do that.
Okay.
Good morning.
Good morning. Are you on your own?
I am. It's just me this morning.
That's right. No, not a problem.
I was just expecting a second person. That's all right.
Now we've got 10 minutes, uh, with you.
So, um, the floor is yours. You know what to do.
Thank you. I'm Thomas Harray.
I'm, uh, a barrister
and a member of the Law Society's Human Rights
and Privacy Reform Committee.
Uh, and, and
and addressing this morning, I really wanted to focus on
effectively the three concerns that are
highlighted in the written submissions.
And just to summarize those, uh, the,
the law society's concerned about, uh, the necessity
for this proposed reform, uh, its consistency or
otherwise with principle, uh, including
what we say are risks of, uh, chilling
or limiting the exercise of fundamental
and protected freedoms.
And then thirdly, uh, the effectiveness or, uh, potentially
otherwise of the bill.
So I'm not going to, um, perverse in detail all
of the details in the, in the submission.
Um, it's there. I'll just touch on some key points.
So firstly, uh, necessity.
So the explanatory note frames this as a problem
as being a gap in the law.
Uh, the bill is contextualized in terms of, um, the,
the Supreme Court case in Brooke,
although it's not clear necessarily about the importance
of privacy, uh, in the context of protests
and other demonstrations, particularly when, uh,
the demonstration is affecting a target person's home.
So it would seem that police might be left uncertain
about when and whether they are able
to properly intervene to dispel a protest.
And of course, as we know,
the courts will weigh privacy interests, which, um,
aren't protected currently in the, in the Bill
of Rights Act against other protected
and explicitly protected, uh, rights and freedoms.
And the obvious ones are freedom of expression, freedom
of peaceful assembly, and freedom of movement.
And so in Bruer, where we've got the split Supreme Court,
uh, this meant that the offense that was charged there
of disorderly conduct, uh, didn't, um,
get across the line, so to speak.
So, um, we see that the policy decision underlying this is
to create a specific offense intended
to give police more comfort in having legal grounds
to intervene, to break up disruptive protest activity.
Uh, that would certainly seem to be, uh,
the likely result of the offense.
But more problematic is what happens
after the arrests are made and charges are laid.
Uh, it doesn't necessarily follow, we say that
once the charges are laid, the cases will, um,
actually track through the courts.
There, there would seem to be a real question about whether
arrests made in terms of this bill, uh, would satisfy
the, um, the, the public interest test and prosecution or,
or for example, the prosecution
guidelines that the police follow.
Uh, so in, in our view, it makes it debatable as to whether
or not this proposed offense is actually going
to achieve its stated goal, um, in terms
of clarifying the law, uh,
and to the extent that it bolster confidence, uh, in police
to intervene and disrupt demonstrations.
Um, we say there may be, uh,
questions remaining about whether
or not that is democratically and um,
or legally justified
Soha. Could you just be
clear about why you think courts will have
trouble interpreting
and, uh, coming to a view, uh, you made that assertion,
but I don't quite understand the logic of it.
Uh, well, as, as I come to, and,
and this is later in the submissions, there's, um,
potential definition, potential definition problems in terms
of that, um, the way that the offense has been drafted,
and this is to do with the nearness of, uh, of, of the,
um, protest to the, to the offense.
And actually, I'll, I'll touch on the point
now 'cause it's been raised.
Um, the way this is drafted would potentially give rise
to a situation where, um, to, to draw on Brooker
as a factual example.
And Brooke, we've got the, the person singing songs
outside the police officer's house.
Now, the way that this offense is currently drafted
would mean that if the target of that protest, um, put up
with it, the next door neighbors of
that police officer could legitimately say,
oh, we've had enough of this.
We want the police, um, involved.
So there's, um, potentially, and,
and I, I, I'm careful not to overstate it.
Um, there are potentially problems with, um, the scope
of the offense which need working through.
Uh, and, and,
and that's where I I think to address your concerns, sir,
the, um, the, the point raised is, is one of definition
and clarifying the scope of the offense.
And, um, it, it's in the written submission,
but there are other offenses on the books
which do the same thing effectively.
Uh, so this really brings me back to where I was, um,
which is that in the law society's view, the size
of the gap in the law is potentially overstated.
Uh, and as I've just said,
there are potentially other applicable offenses, um,
including, uh, stalking
and harassment, which as we know is, uh, is working its way
through, um, parliament at the moment.
So that was the first topic.
The second concern, um, is that the process
and implementing this new offense
is not necessarily consistent, uh, with best practice.
Uh, we, the law society have concerns about both the policy
process which has been followed, uh,
and some of the what seems to be open-ended
and discretionary nature, uh, uh, of the new section five B,
which would seem to lack clarity expected
of the criminal law.
Uh, it's pretty clear that this bill has been progressed in
a, in an accelerated timeframe.
Uh, and Our concern is that to the extent
that this new offense engages quite, quite important issues
of personal privacy butting up against freedom to protest,
there are really big questions at play here,
which will ultimately be left to the courts to figure out.
Uh, and in our view, some extra consultation time
might have assisted, uh, in finding the balance
between these competing rights.
We've touched on, uh, I've touched on a little bit, uh,
offense clarity, um,
and how this new offense is intended
to provide greater certainty
around the parameters of lawful protest.
But, uh, as I've said, it doesn't necessarily get there.
Uh, the courts will have a fairly wide discretion
to assess whether or not, uh,
the disruptive conduct was unreasonable.
And the law society's concern is that
that potentially undermines the fundamental principle
that the criminal law needs to be as clear
and as certain as possible.
Of course, a protester, just like any other, uh, person,
needs to know what they are doing, might be criminal
in advance of doing it.
Uh, and u
until there's case law clarifying the interpretation of
that new section five B, it would become difficult
to know which side of the line, uh,
certain conduct may fall.
So, as I mentioned just at the start
before, uh, a case even reaches court here, we, we think
that there is a risk of unreasonably chilling
or curtailing, um, the right to protest, um,
relying on the courts as the backstop to, to,
to avoid convictions.
In cases where police might have been premature in taking
steps to stop a protest, uh, sets a safeguard in place,
which only operates
after the harm has been done to a person's rights.
Um, at that point, it would be too late
to correct any infringements
because the protest has been and gone.
So, thirdly.
And lastly, uh,
our recommendations on improving the drafting.
Uh, we say that, uh, these recommendations,
if adopted wouldn't necessarily cure the concerns,
but, uh, would assist in contributing to clarity.
So we say that there should be a statutory requirement
that police give protestors a warning, uh,
and we advise, we, we agree with the advice that, um,
has been provided to cabinet on this point.
Uh, that giving a warnings the preferable approach,
and I'd add here that it goes some way
to making the law knowable.
If a protestor is warned, uh, that
what they're doing is unlawful, they then have the choice
to either continue on with it or, or not.
And, uh, that would be consistent with,
for example, the Trespass Act.
Uh, we say that there needs to be clarification about
what near residential premises means.
Uh, does it mean directly
outside premises within view on the same street, uh,
within a hundred meters, something else, uh, that needs
to be ironed out.
Uh, and we also suggest the addition of statutory factors,
including reference to the content of
what is being expressed by a protest.
Pro protests happen for all sorts of different reasons,
of course, um, some of them more aligned with, um,
social values than others,
and that should be something that can be taken into account.
Uh, and also, uh, a statutory reference
to the importance of, uh, the right
to free speech and public assembly.
Um, an explicit reference to the fact that this bill
or, or this proposed defense does,
but up against other explicitly, um,
explicitly set out, um, rights in the Bill and Rights Act.
So, um, those were the three concerns and,
and real summary terms, um,
of what's written in our, um, submission. Thank you.
Right now we've got a number of people.
I'm gonna go to Ms. Walters first.
Um, thank you Thomas, very much for your submission
and setting out key issues.
I'm just wondering if there's also potentially a problem
with the, um, col potentially collective nature
of the actors race.
So you could turn up at a protest
and essentially be standing there, holding a sign,
doing nothing else, and then it becomes something else
and be arrested, as you say, without warning,
which is quite different from the current offenses
that we have that enable police to respond.
Certainly we have riot,
but Riot appears to require some sort
of violent act from everyone,
an intent from everyone participating.
Is that potentially an issue as well? Um,
Potentially, although I'd say that, um,
the party liability provisions
of the Crimes Act probably go, go some way to curing that,
although in, in terms of creating an offense,
which is workable, um, you, you can imagine the frustration
of a, uh, for example, district court judge faced
with a applying party liability to a, the, the lowest level,
um, criminal offense, um, that, that would,
would cause potentially serious, um, headaches and delays.
But, um, I, I agree.
I think, uh, collective, you know,
I mean, these kinds
of collective protests cause problems
for the law, don't they? Mm-hmm.
Alright. Um, I've got honorable Dun, uh, Dr. Duncan Webb.
Thanks, Mr. Chair.
My question is this, with, with the, um, potential
of a warning, would the offense then be
not dispersing when a warning had been given?
Um, because there is a risk then
that the police can actually give a warning when
arguably you haven't reached the threshold.
Um, because of course, trespass, if you're on land,
it's very clear, get off the land,
here's your warning, get off.
Um, whereas if it's, I think you're being a bit too noisy
and therefore if you don't stop, I'm going to arrest you,
that puts a lot of discretion in the more
discretion in the hands of the
police. Can you comment on that?
I, I, I think we'd agree with that, um, with
that proposition.
Um, and this is where we got to in,
in the written submissions, which is
that there is a real risk that the, uh, that the actions
of police in dispersing a protest, um,
cause damage to rights, which are then irredeemable.
Because protests typically, typically speaking, um,
are defined temporarily
and geographically, uh, every Saturday between 10
and 12:00 PM at, um, the Bridge of Remembrance, for example,
here in Christchurch, uh, now if the police take steps
to remove someone from that protest, then that's,
that's the end of it for them, for
that, for that period of time.
And the, the remedy, um, of,
uh, you know, the, the courts getting rid of the conviction
or, or quashing, it doesn't solve the initial harm, which is
that they wanted to protest at that time in that place,
and they were then prevented from doing so.
Look, can I stop on that?
That that's an extraordinary proposition.
Um, you've gotta have someone who makes the call
and the police officers are the first line
of defense in enforcing the law.
So you've gotta be able to give the police some jurisdiction
around making that decision.
I take the point about the warning,
and I take Duncan's point around that warning needs
to be a proper warning.
It can't be given one minute and rested the next second.
Um, but what is the, what's the
alternative if you don't allow the police
to have some jurisdiction around it or,
or discretion around it?
What, what, what proposition would you put forward
to having any rules around the protest?
Who, who should enforce that if it's not the place?
Well, well, I think that, um,
with respect goes slightly further than, uh, the,
the law society's position and,
and certainly further than the submission I'm making on
behalf of the law society.
What, what we're saying is that, um, a warning is, is a,
an appropriate addition to this bill.
Yeah. Um, the police do need to have the ability to respond
to criminal behavior and,
and experience suggests in, in insofar
as the police are using, um, existing offenses to respond
to protest, which crosses the line into unlawful behavior
that the police are actually operating fairly responsibly.
Uh, and and there have been recent examples,
and I can only speak to, to Christchurch, which is
where I'm based, but there have been recent examples where,
um, warnings have been given
and to give the police officers involved full credit,
repeated warnings have been given, um, so as
to make completely unambiguous that, um, in the views
of the police officer.
Uh, the protest has, um, crossed
that line from being lawful into being unlawful.
And what the law society is submitting in respect
of the proposed amendment to this bill is that, uh,
bringing a warning system into play is, um,
is a necessary component.
And as I've said, uh,
it wouldn't necessarily cure the law society's concerns more
generally, but, uh, would certainly go some way
to assisting the clarity of the criminal law.
Thank you. Now we've got
Mr. Stevenson, and I've got one more.
Can I ask, I haven't asked any
Question. Yeah, no, we're gonna get to,
um, Mr. Stevenson,
I'm just going your next, Jenny, I'll be quick.
Thomas, thank you for your submission.
And it's a very detailed written submission.
We really appreciate that.
Um, and I, we take the point on the warning.
A another idea that, um, the Council
of Civil Liberties this morning, um,
discussed was maybe a better framework would be
around the restrictions, um, around protesting
around abortion clinics,
which obviously have a written warning
and they also have a fine only, et cetera.
Would you have a position on that as the law society?
Uh, look, I'd want to go
and consider that, um, specific angle more carefully.
Yeah. Um, I, I don't think I'd want to go
and, um, commit the law society to a no, no,
a position on it, uh, on my feet, so to speak.
Alright, that's fine. Thank you.
I've got, um, Ms. Anderson on board. Thank
You. Um, I found this
discussion really helpful, Thomas, um,
if you can out, so I'm really interested to know
what you think the existing gap is in the law.
So, um, given, um, we've heard, um, like obstruction
of a pathway, disturbing a piece, et cetera, do,
do you believe that there's, um,
an existing gap in the law, is my first question.
And, and secondly, um,
if you are proposing a warning type system c can't please do
that anyway, please just mean anybody, you,
they've got the discretion to be able
to choose mental or not.
So how is what you are proposing different to
what exists within there?
Well, um, I,
I think the law society would say there's not a particularly
significant gap in the law.
Um, there are of obstruct way
and these offenses commonly, uh, to respond to cases
where protests cross, um, cross the line.
Um, the, the law society would, would accept in,
in general terms that, uh,
well, the, the right to personal privacy is a,
is a really important value.
Um, it's not explicit in the Bill of Rights Act,
and we're not saying necessarily it needs to be, um, we're,
we're certainly not saying let's reform the Bill
of Rights Act in order to get us, um,
to a place constitutionally where we can, uh,
create these offenses.
But it would seem that
the police have no difficulty in, uh,
going ahead with disorderly behavior charges, for example,
um, The warning system.
Um, my, my understanding of the warning system is that
that's been rolled back slightly by police.
Um, I think there was a judicial review about that a couple
of years ago, um, where the legality
of the warning system was questioned,
but to take trespass, for example, um,
and it, it doesn't quite sit squarely with
what we're proposing here
because, um, here, of course there might not be a trespass,
it might be a protest purely on public land,
but, um, the warning system with trespass, um,
seems to work very well.
Did you have another question? Right,
Rima? Alright, thank you.
Thanks, Mr. Chair.
I note that we are over, but I,
I think we've got some spare time from other
people that haven't showed up.
Um, Thomas, thank you, um, for your insight.
I just wanna ask, um, you were mention,
you mentioned earlier the, um, the stalking law that we've,
we've passed through and, um,
and so what if we are in a situation
where the person living in a home, um,
that protesters are in front of them says to the protesters,
I really don't want you to to be here.
Um, and so that's considered like a warning from that person
and those protestors stay there.
Would you say that they are stalking?
Well, I don't think I could say that.
Um, and in, in general hypothetical terms
as you've, as you've set it out potentially, um,
and as I was reflecting on, um, the submission this morning
and preparing for this, uh, hearing, it occurred to me that,
um, it it's an interesting facet
of current political discourse that
some people take, um, the protest too far, don't they?
And, and, um, we've seen, for example, um, very,
very recently instances in the media of, of protesters,
um, well damaging personal property.
Um, and it would seem to me, without having, um,
looked at it very carefully,
but it would seem to me that those are the kinds of things
that might then give rise to a, a, a warning for
that stalking or harassment kind of behavior, um, uh,
together with of course, um, charges on their own.
Right. So I think there's an overlap potentially, uh,
but d difficult to say in general terms with,
without potentially being more specific.
Alright. Um, just one question that,
that your second last point was about, uh, this definition,
and because there's a lack of clarity,
it would make it more difficult, you know,
because the person ought to have known what the offense mark
was when they committed the so-called offense.
But in terms of the definition of nearness
or near, um, have you got any guidance for the committee
around how you'd better, um, define that?
Uh, no is the short answer.
Um, if that was a point that the, the committee
wanted additional input on from the law society, um,
could certainly provide that, um, in,
in a supplementary submission.
Uh, but that was not something that we
suggested specific wording for, um,
in our written submission.
Okay. Alright. Cool.
Um, well we might, um, circle back to you on that.
Um, alright, any other questions, um, for members helpful.
Right? Very good. Thank you Mr. Harra.
Harry, that's a very useful conversation this morning.
Thank you. All right, thank you.
Right now we are on to, I think
that's, sorry, Archie?
Archie. Archie Hunter. Oh, Mr. Hunter. Mr. Hunter.
Um, if you're there, you'd be great if you could join us.
There you are. Now we've got, um,
five minutes with you, Mr. Hunter.
Great. Um,
I really appreciate the submission from Mr. Hardy,
the New Zealand Law Society,
and I'm gonna, um, bring up a lot of the same concerns,
which I think you'll hear a lot throughout.
This government needs to take seriously any law
restricting people's right to protest.
It's a basic tenant of democracy
that the public can hold the government accountable
for its decisions and actions.
I appreciate that the intent is to protect MPS and any,
but any work to address a threat to mps safety needs
to be well thought out.
And this bill is not well thought out.
It lacks clear and accurate language
and provisions to make sure
that our democratic rights are protected.
There is no explanation
or specific measurement of what is being there.
A residence means that criminalizes what is described as
unreasonable disruption does not def entail how that behave.
Different acts or is intimidate harassment threats, trespass
and excessive noise, which are already prohibited
by the Summary Offenses Act, harassment Act, trespass Act
and Crimes Act to name a few, um, which is suggests
that this bill is either unnecessary
or designed to target peaceful protests.
Its definition of what, uh,
primary residences includes legitimate protest sites like
embassies where an embassy is in residence, uh,
ambassador is in residence
and Premier House where the Prime Minister lives.
It gives police powers to arrest without warning
and relies heavily on police discretion without protection
from discriminatory and inconsistent decision making.
So the combination of vague wording, the power
to arrest without warning
and subjective interpretation by police of
what unreasonable disruption is, will result in a law
that is rife for misuse.
Um, as Mr. Hare said, it's, there's a lot of uncertainty
with this law, um, which makes it fairly, um, uh,
unmanageable and unusable.
The bill should not proceed,
and instead the government needs to work with mps,
especially those who experience the worst threatening
behavior in this country, who, uh, woman Maori
and Rainbow mps
to address safety concerns without unreasonably restricting
the rights of all New Zealanders
to have their say in a democracy.
Thanks.
Thank you, Mr. Hunter.
Uh, right members, we've got any questions? Mr. Hunter?
Thank you. Alright.
Hey, thank you for your, uh,
submission this morning, Hy and to the Point.
So congratulate you on that.
Thank you. Right now, um, where are we going now?
Okay, I think we've got Miss, uh, Jenson Butler.
Is that right? Uh, two, sorry.
22 Theresa, good morning,
Me again.
Alright, cool. Nice to see you
Demonstrate.
Bill threatens the very essence
of our democracy, our rights,
and our collective voice as a people of the heart
of protests are the voices of our people.
Protest is not just noise, it is the heartbeat.
It is how the people of this land, Maori Pacifica
migrant students, kotahi,
have always made change.
If this bill had existed in the past,
we would not have had the spring protests Ba in Point
and the Fores Sure.
And Seabed marches Ihu al
or even the, the, the many community movements
that shaped our local Christchurch history From peace
marches to workers strikes in Otto Tahi,
our people have always gathered with man UA and purpose.
This bill silences that.
Right now we've had huge numbers with no arrests
at the Bridge of Remembrance, Hagley part with limited
presence of police because
of why our communities have turned up to support
and protect our whanau.
So a big mehi to our Maori wardens here in Otto Tahi.
So, you know, Otto Tahi has a known
grief, resilience, and unity.
We have seen how many communities come together in times
of crisis, crisis after the earthquakes, the moss shootings,
and through numerous floods and fires.
We know that when people come together to stand for justice,
whether it's housing, education, health, all rights, always
the collection sure spill to ordinary people,
not just activists,
but everyday CI citizens, whanau neighbors, church groups,
union members, nurses, teachers, parents,
and students at risk, turning, peaceful community action
into an offense, which Mr.
Hari has, uh, from the law society he
has outlined very, very clearly.
For Maori, this bill feels familiar, another law
that restricts our right to stand on our own UA
and speak our truth.
From the days of the Maori wars to bastion point
to the current struggles for
and recognition of protests have been a tool of survival
for Pacific communities, for migrants,
and for all minorities.
The ability to speak out publicly is often the only power we
have against systems that ignore or silence us.
Again, Maori women
and the rainbow community,
this bill creates fear.
It will make think twice about joining a peaceful march.
It will make our wonder if standing for climate action
or workers' rights will get them them a criminal record.
It will make our communities
who already face police over surveillance even more
cautious about exercising their democratic rights.
But wait, now let's look at the effect across all walks
of life, this bill doesn't discriminate.
It affects everyone.
Union members who might protest low wages
or unsafe working conditions stand in against violence
or fighting for equity.
Public sector workers and teachers asking for fair funding.
Health workers who have March
or better who believe in the, if we demonstrate
where decisions or injustices are visible, then
where can we do that?
If we silence the streets, we silence the people.
The, the bill introduces new offenses for protests deemed
targeted or disruptive.
But who decides what is disruptive?
A mother standing outside an MP's house
with a sign about benefit cuts.
Ah, is that disruptive?
A group of climate activists singing
outside a CEO's home is that criminal.
This vagueness gives enormous power
and control to authorities and police to interpret
and punish as they see fit.
And history tells us Maori
and Pacific people are disproportionately under vague
and discretionary laws.
Where in this build does it show protecting democracy,
not silencing it?
Show me that democracy isn't just about
voting every three years.
It's about being able to speak stand depose
and demand change depend, uh, between those elections.
The right to protest is protected under Article 19
of the international, uh, covenant on the Civil
and Political Rights.
And under article two of te,
which guarantees Maori the right to self-determination
and voice by limiting protest,
this bill undermines both international law and principles.
So what about our Otto Tahi voices?
Otto Tahi is a proud history of speaking out whether
for peace, just work
or environment we stood for zoned
this threatens that local spirit.
It replaces with silence, it replaces unity with fear,
and it replaces the mana of the collective action
with the control of the state.
So today, urge this committee
and all those listening right now to remember who we are
as a people, as a nation.
We are not a nation built on silence.
We are built on f**k, papa, solidarity and courage.
When people stand together, we, we are stronger, not weaker.
This bill does not protect people.
It protects power and control.
I stand with today with Maori Pacific, Pia
and all peoples who value, freedom, dignity,
and justice reject this bill, protect our right to speak,
to stand to march and to be heard.
Thank you very much. Now, um, members,
Yeah, I have One question from Mr. Stevenson.
Now, thank you for your submission
and I can assure you we also, uh,
believe in free speech and the right to protest.
Um, the CTU said this morning, actually, they've, other than
outside an embassy, they haven't, um, protested
outside private residence.
Has your group ever protested outside a private residence?
Well, we've walked, so when you look at tu,
we walked all the way from the bridge of Remembrance to,
um, new Brighton Beach.
We walked past thousands of homes, right?
Thousands of private residents. And what did they do?
They came out, they gave us kai, they gave us water.
They had music playing.
So when you have a movement that is given, aha,
respect is returned.
So not all protests are evil
or sitting on the other side of the fence, right?
But you weren't, but you weren't protesting outside
of specific R residents, right?
You were, I totally understand what you're saying,
which is sounds great,
but you weren't targeting an individual residence. No,
No problem here.
All right. Right. Any other questions from any members?
Hey, thank you very much for your contribution this morning.
Um, uh, very helpful. And, uh,
Okay, Now who have we got?
Now we going to welcome.
Okay, uh, Raquel, uh,
Tania, are you available?
Can you guys hear me? Good morning.
Yeah, we've got five minutes with you.
Okay, awesome. I won't take that long.
Um, Koto and thank you for the opportunity to speak.
My name is Raquel and I'm here
because I believe that protesting is a
heartbeat of a democracy.
And it's how ordinary people make themselves heard.
When those in power turn away,
bill would silence their heartbeat.
For centuries in OT
or disruption has been a vital force of progress.
Think of the SU jets demanding the vote,
the spring vote tour protest, interrupting sports
to comfort, to confront racial injustice,
and the revolutionary Polynesians activists
during the Don raids.
These, um, acts weren't polite or comfortable.
They were necessary,
but today, this amendment bill threatens to turn those kinds
of protests into criminal acts simply
because they accord new residential premises
that's deeply concerning.
The bill uses terms like targeted and disruptive,
but offers no clear definitions of
how much disruption is too much, how near is near,
or what regular occupants really means.
The drafting is so vague that people
and police may not even know what's being criminalized.
Here we already have laws to address harassment, trespass,
loud noise and obstruction.
So why this additional offense?
Imagine someone holding a sign outside the residence
of a decision maker, peaceful, symbolic part
of a democratic culture of protests under this bill.
They may fear rest because nearness is under defined
and disruption is subjective.
Their fear silences voices,
especially those from marginalized communities
who already struggle to be heard.
Privacy in the home is important,
but a protest near residency, some is sometimes the only way
to make the connection.
Clear. Decisions made
behind closed doors affect many lives.
Um, criminalizing that space of dissent, privileges,
comfort over accountability.
I urge the committee, please don't criminalize courage.
Protect the right to protest and reject this bill.
Thank you very much, right, members.
Thanks Chair. Um, thanks for your submission
and appreciate the right to protest.
There has been, I suppose,
some discussion about the connection between the right
to protest and the responsibility that comes with it.
And in some of the previous submissions we had in our
previous hearing, uh, there was reference to language
and uh, direction of commentary
that could occur on the boundaries, for example,
of MP's residences, um, directed at members of uh,
uh, an MP's family.
Do you think that's appropriate?
And do you think that, um, it should be allowed
as part of that right to protest?
Or do you think the right to protest does come
with responsibility
and that it's reasonable to expect that MPS families, um,
and loved ones, are able to have
space in private residence away from the roles
of their partners or parents or children?
Yes. Yes. No, um, I agree that language, uh,
far language shouldn't be used anywhere, even if they are
in a public space that shouldn't be used.
I think we should educate our children to know how
to protest, to know how to go somewhere public
or a residential area and not to swear at others
and not say hurtful things.
So supplement chair.
So given, um, the right to protest enables protestors
to come and protest outside my office
or, uh, in the local park,
or in a place where it gets a lot of public vision,
you know, like the, the local square in Wong Nui,
for example, majestic Square.
Mm-hmm. Why is it necessary to put at risk, um,
the potential for, for example, MP's, children
and family to be, um, in a position
where they could receive some fairly hateful, um,
language directed at them as a previous submitter said
was appropriate?
And I'm not gonna detail exactly
what they said was appropriate, but let's just accept
for a moment that it would be considered by most of us
as extremely unacceptable language and behavior
And who draws their line.
If I go and protest
and I say, I think our taxes should be different,
like something like that, you know, like,
or I don't know what, who can, who is the police going
to tell us?
The citizen what is offensive and what is not?
We kind of know what is, you know, we know we as a society,
we draw those lines of what is offensive
or what is offensive and what is not.
But are we gonna arrest anyone, like say even on a traffic
situation, um, if you say something bad to someone, uh,
is the police gonna come and arrest me
because I'm like close or the the other guy
because I'm close to residence.
Like how, where do you draw those lines of
what is offensive and what's not?
Alright, thank you Ms. Bates.
I've got a quick question from Ms. Walter.
Just, just a very quick supplementary, um, just from
what you've said, Rael, it sounds
to me like you are in favor of continuing
to keep the existence existing Section four
of the Summary Offenses Act,
which is about offensive behavior
and language in the current law,
which is, it's already there.
Let's keep it there, is what you're saying?
Yeah. Yeah. Sounds about right.
All right. Hey, thank you
for your contribution this morning.
Uh, very helpful and, uh, have a good day
right now. Who are we?
Thanks for having me. Thank
You, Mar. Sorry,
Marni. Manny, uh, we've got, uh, Ms.
Manny, uh, miss Marni, uh, Prickett, I think. There you are.
Good to see you. Now we've got five minutes with you.
Um, looking forward to hearing your contribution.
Great. Uh, Koto. Um, my name's Marni Prickett.
Good morning Select committee members.
I hope that you can all hear me well.
I'm, I'm beaming in from, um, sunny.
Yeah, you're beaming in. Um,
uh, thank you for your time.
Um, so to support my written submission, I'd like to just,
um, draw your attention to the wider
context of what's proposed.
Proposed in this bill. As I'm sure other, um,
submitters have said, protestors a foundation of democracy
along with free and fair elections,
fair public participation in democratic processes
of policymaking and other democratic processes.
And so what I'm asking the select committee, um,
this morning so that this context
of this current governing government is at the pillars
of this through this policy, um, through this bill rather,
um, and through other bills such as reforming voting law
to make it more difficult for people to vote, um,
circumventing good policy process through the overuse
of urgency and introducing a regulatory standards bill
that would constrain
and build barriers for responsible regulation, um,
by governments that would regulation that
contract we talking about this morning, um,
intends to restrict protest not in a precise
and carefully targeted way, which would address a specific
and significant issue.
But instead, I see it as a, as restricting protest in a,
in a, in a rooted in Broadway, which is unnecessary
as we have existing laws
that address harassment at people's private residences
and that as to deal with, um, with issues.
And I acknowledge that the harassment of, um, MPS
and other people public facing roles is a real issue.
We have existing laws that can deal with this.
Democracy relies on a number of pillars, pillars,
and these pillars are not a given.
They were built, um, by people
and they can be damaged by people.
And this bill is one of a number of actions
that the government's taking that erode both pillars.
So as politicians,
you select committee members play a crucial, um,
a a really crucial role in protecting and defending
and implementing democracy.
And what I'm asking you today is
to consider if this government is consciously
or unconsciously taking actions that undermine
and erode corrode our democracy.
And I ask you to be the defenders of our democracy.
So finally, what if what I've said rings a bell with you?
If you are thinking sort of about the broader context
of this bill, um,
and you have concerns about it, um, I really recommend,
and if you would just like to have information how
democracies can and have od and how they can be protected
and defended, I highly recommend a book called How
Democracy Dies.
It's by a couple of Harvard professors.
It's very good, it's readable, it's very clear.
Um, and it explains
how existing democracies can backslide how they're vulnerable.
And it highlights the crucial critical role that you
as politicians and political parties
play in protecting our, our democracies.
So, um, Koto, thank you very much for your time.
If there's time for questions, um,
but that's the end of my presentation.
Thank you, Ms. Prickett. Uh, right. Anyone else?
Anyone got questions?
That doesn't mean it's not, um, important submission,
it's just that we've got lots of submissions.
So thank you very much for your time this morning. Thank
You. Sure.
Alright, now, sorry.
Why don't we take members? We'll take a five minute break.
You could do 10. 10. Okay. Let's just got her hand up.
I don't know if she's, oh, sorry. Rima,
Miss the chair. Um,
I don't know if anyone else is on Zoom hearing this, but
whenever we've got someone on Zoom submitting,
there's a lot of feedback.
Um, are you hearing it to my focus
On Zoom? No.
Yeah, I'm, it, it's, it's,
I think it's the sound from the committee rooms
that brings feedback in.
Yeah. Okay. Well, we'll have a look at that.
We are just gonna adjourn for 10 minutes.
Um, if you can be just back here just
before 10, that would be ideal.
11. Uh, sorry.
Before 11, we've got a few, uh, little gaps in the, um,
program people haven't shown up.
So we're just going to, um,
set aside the meeting for 10 minutes.
So if you keep back just
before if the Wellington Community Justice project teams
there we're, um, looking forward to hearing from you.
Is that you? Emily? Are you part of? Cool, thank you. Yes.
Sorry, I'm not too sure how to make this work entirely,
so have to forgive me.
It seems we've got,
Okay. We've got 10
minutes of your, when you're ready,
Kota. My name is
Emily Groan.
Uh, thank you, uh, to the committee
for accepting our oral submission.
On behalf of the Wellington Community Justice Project, uh,
we are a student volunteer initiative from the law school at
and as an organization dedicated
to servicing our communities
and amplifying our community's voices.
The WCJP would like to submit that the bill presented
to the today would be an unjustifiable restriction on rights
within our table.
Hey,
Um, Emily, Emily, uh,
we're just sorry if we, sorry to interrupt.
We're just having a little bit of trouble hearing you.
I wondered if Zian, but it seems like it's yours.
It might be just need to be close or something. Okay.
I think we're just getting a little bit of feedback. Mm-hmm.
Alright. We'll see how this thing goes.
Um, can this be heard a bit better
And just try your speaker a little bit.
Close your mouth maybe on your headphone,
but anyway, just, uh, we'll try and listen in.
Okay. Carefully. Okay. Carry on. That's all right. Yeah.
So, uh,
the Wellington Community Justice Project would like to
submit that the demonstrations in your residential premises
would be, uh, unjustifiable restriction
is,
I assume it's,
it would pose an unfair restriction on protests
because it seeks to restrict protest activities
that are natural to protest.
Protests inherently are meant to be disruptive.
They're meant to take place for long periods of time
or moderate periods of time.
They are meant to generate significant levels of noise
and listen the distance in between the protestors
and the choice, these are all, which we
by courts, to evaluate
what unreasonable disruptions are.
But if protests do these things naturally does that,
that all protests are subject to the restrictions
of the under this amendment.
We would also like to emphasize that the right to protest
is extremely in 2025, the number
of bills passed through the urgency has increased
Remarkably statistics from the Parliamentary library
show from 2020
until 20 23 15 bills were passed
under urgency.
And then from 2023
until early 20 25, 30 bills have been
documented to have been passed under urgency.
The public is rightfully entitled
to input over rules being imposed over themselves
and their own country, yet have been cut out
of consultation time and time again.
Protests realistically are one of the few ways
that could signal people feeling without having parliaments
that concrete rules blocking their voices.
We also believe it is not in the interests of the public
or protestors to pass this bill
with little readily available evidence
for why the bill is necessary.
Most protestors reasonably comply
with the new Bill Ofs Act.
Article five Limitations.
As the w CJP has said, protesting
or political action is a time consuming activity
and not protestors, no,
it's not in their best interests to conduct themselves
to respectfully
and peacefully make the most outta that time
exercising their opinions with the regulatory
statement of the bill, not containing much further evidence
of protestors causing problems outside of residences
as a general pattern in society.
And also the, sorry, apologies.
And also the investigations of the
council civil liberties, finding that the
report used to back the bill only using
and public sites as justification for the bill.
It doesn't seem to be a great use of parliamentary resources
and a great limitation to society to propose.
Thank you.
Right. Thank you very much.
Been a little bit hard to hearing,
but we've listened intently.
Any questions from anyone?
Can I just on cross, uh, four of your, um, submission,
you talk about you buy implications, say that it's fine
to protest outside people's homes and you,
because you say, uh, there's a stretch to say there's cause
for fear intimidation for these people, uh,
because such since most protests are peaceful, so
by implication you think, um, it's fine
to be protesting out anyone's home
and I'm talking about a residential home
and an individual's home.
You think that is, that is, um,
a perfectly appropriate mechanism.
You, but do you accept that, uh, if you do so you need
to do it within a reasonable standard of, of behavior?
We accept that there should be a reasonable standard
of behavior, but it should be
a generally standard not one targeting protest.
And the bill in the way how it supposed be implemented
looks to go and restrict activities that happen
in the natural course of peaceful and civilized.
Okay. Cool. Alright. Um, I think we're there.
Hey, thank you very much for, uh, joining us this morning
and, um, vetting your way through that.
That's very, uh, very good. Thank you very much. Thank you.
Right now, um, have we got Lucy, right?
Uh, Lucy and Rose, do you, uh, Mr. Rose, um,
we've got five minutes with you.
No doubt you're quite experienced at this.
Sure. Are you
Sure?
So protest is a mirror that keeps democracy honest.
This bill has nothing to do with privacy.
Bill is about shielding those in power
from appropriate accounts.
The attention to the people
are the ones solving the ones you care about, wellbeing
of our society, the people signing the prevalence
of an issue have an investment issue in ing.
I wanna make an analogy. You remember back at school when
there's a group of bullies causing rampant harm in the
playground, but for some reason it's the child
who was brave enough to stand up to those bullies
who the school administration chooses to crack down on.
But we all understood that the child
who spoke up was not the one causing the disruption.
The bullies were, but the school
wasn't worried about the bullies.
The school only cared that their parents financially
and their institution, the cost of that is the wellbeing
of all of the students at that school.
The stat situation on the scale
of a nation is an incredibly sinister concept.
And the phrasing of this bill is so open to interpretation.
It would allow the shutdown of any protest in any location.
And protest is a core feature of a functioning democracy.
Attacks on freedom of speech are not that implement
bill police engagement to influence against bravest people
with the integrity of the hold government to account.
And a law based on something as ambiguous
as discomfort is basically opening the against
for further violence against marginalized people
simply existing in our bodies.
This bill is an attack on freedom of speech
and it's going to cause a real issue in our society
and distract from the real issues which protest attempt
to bring constructive attention to.
Ultimately, if you've been convinced that a little bit
of noise is a bigger disruption to your day than the topics
of protest, then your priorities are out of line, not only
with your people, but with your humanity itself.
And protest is a reflection of what issues need attention
to remove that mirror only leaves us in the dark,
pretending things aren't happening,
doesn't stop them happening, it aids them.
And we are better than that.
The government is supposed
to serve the people not the other way around.
And people have a right to protest the actions of the state,
which are against the interests of the voice of the people.
That is the pinnacle of democracy. Democracy.
It is your job to hear the voice people.
You do not the go the people hired you
to do the freedom of speech.
Protest is not the government who's interested to its.
And protestors also a part
of our country's history in New Zealand during apartheid.
South Africa. Protest in this country was a part
of our national identity that we stand up for what's right.
We are not bullied into complicity and we
and Aldo care about other people.
Banning protest is an insult to that legacy.
And make no mistake, that is exactly
what this bill would do.
If we have museums dedicated to protest history with pride,
it's easy for us to look back now
and claim we would've done the right thing.
But protesters had to have the courage
to stand up at the time.
So my question is, at this time in
history, what are we doing?
Because protests are not just a wake up call,
they're a call back to our courage
and capability that we can address the reality
of the issues at hand and do something about it.
What this bill would do is ultimately protect people in
power from seeing the reality of their choices.
It's about washing your hands
of the impact of your policies.
And in fact, the word that I would invoke here
with full respect is cowardice.
You are making decisions
that have material consequences in other people's lives.
And if you cannot hold the depth of that responsibility,
then you should not be in government.
A protein mirror that mirror know that I urge
to throw out this, this people for our democracy
and out of respect, the legacy
and identity of the best
of New Zealand protest must be protected.
It is the mirror that keeps the democracy honest.
And my hope is that when we look into it,
we're gonna see something reflected back that any child
who stood up for themselves is gonna be proud
of. Thank you so much.
Thank you Mr. Rose. Um, very good submission. Right.
Any questions from Yeah,
I've got a question from Mr. Stevenson.
Thank you. Thank you for your submission.
Um, we're here earlier this morning,
obviously there's already, um, restrictions say
around protesting outside an abortion clinic.
Do you think we should remove those restrictions as well?
Oh, I think bad faith, I think we know what about here.
Um, all of this new crackdown on protest has come
as a direct result of the genocide and Palestine,
and I don't think we can ignore the context of that.
I think I trust that every day New Zealanders have a good
trust that we care about not causing harm to other people.
And I think freedom of speech is always going
to be like a core thing that needs
to exist in any kind of discussion.
And when we're like, you are right,
there already are restrictions
around particular protests causing harm.
In that case, why are we making a new bill
that particularly targets new protests?
Like Right. Question reveals itself
I think in that way, right?
We already have enough protection
that is required in real situations
and we need to be honest about
what we're talking about right now. Right?
But so you would accept if a, if a protest
outside a private residence caused
harm, you would be against that.
Who is defining harm?
Well, you just, you just said
we know what harm looks like.
Yeah. So I don't think that's a good faith question.
Actually. We have enough protection for actual harm.
What we're talking about right now is protest.
And if you're talking about privacy
and that that is not actually clearly defined in the bill,
what that means, that has opened up
to any possible location.
What you have legislated is the ability
to ban any protest at any time. And that is a threat.
Well, I don't, that isn't actually what this bill does,
but thank you for your submission.
Okay. Hey, thank you for your submission, Mr. Rose.
I thought it was a very good submission.
Thank you for joining us this morning.
Now we've got, uh, in person that you've turned up
and it's always more effective when you turn up.
So, uh, the floor is yours. We've got five minutes with you.
Thank you. I'm here
to share my opinion on this bill.
And that opinion is that this bill is far too broad for
what it claims to do.
This bill is supposed
to protect people in private residences from being
harassed at protests, correct?
Yes. So why then is the definition
of what constitutes a residence so broad?
It covers all forms of housing, meaning
that in mixed use areas such as this CBD,
it can cause problems for, for example, if you have an MP
who lives in an apartment on napkin key
and a protest is directed at that parliament, at at that
member, or perhaps at their party, is that close enough
to count as breaching this bill?
Is that harassment under this bill? That is far too broad.
Also, the evidence used to justify the need of this bill,
the I-P-C-B-A report, I've read it,
and the line that re
and only one of what it equals
or calls for the use of a,
of legislating against hitting
one point out of meaning.
Most of that report was talking about sitting clear
guidelines and the sitting clear,
and this is not, this is a broad ill defined
and
freedom of expression.
Freedom and freedom of of assembly are key features
of the New Zealand Bill of Rights.
And protest is a key hu human right in order
to uphold democracy.
New Zealand prided itself on being one
of the most democratic nations in the world.
And yet we are suggesting
and bills
and laws that, that are vague ill-defined.
And the effects that they will have on
protest is a slow degradation of
what our country holds dear Protesting is a key part
of New Zealand history and its future.
So for these reasons, I ask that,
that you not progress this bill further without serious
changes in the wording to define what is reasonable,
what is reasonable in terms of a basic property,
what is reasonable in terms of distance.
The police will not thank us for giving them more laws
that are vague, hard to enforce
and ultimately ineffective. Thank you for your time.
Thank you very much. Uh, right now,
first question from Mr. Stevens.
Tha thank you for coming and, um, and your submission
and I think, yeah, you made some great points about mm-hmm
the scope of the, you know, the scope
of the bill and the vagueness.
Just wanna ask you, I just wanna point of clarification.
You said about, um, an MP's apartment in a
say a C, BD apartment.
Yes. Is your concern that, um,
and you said that the, the protest would be specifically
targeting that mp.
Mm-hmm. Is your concern that, um, just
because they're in a CBD re, like is it the fact
that there are apartments in the central business di
district, the concern, or is it
just want you to talk a little bit more about,
So for example, um, basically lockdown has a Ted Data
property quite close to Parliament, correct?
Well, he he's in the premier house, which is Yeah, yeah,
Exactly.
Does that count as a visited data premises?
And if a protest at Parliament was directed at say
Christopher Luxon, is that
distance reasonable or unreasonable?
Unreasonable under the grounds of the bill would mean that,
that the pro protest is liable to be broken up.
Protest is arrested and faced with a fine or jail time.
That's what I'm talking about.
Okay. If, if a protest going down lamp key,
the main route for protests as I've done, done, done, done
for so many is a protest on VIN Key too close
to an apartment on VIN Key. It's too vague. It should,
I think the just difference
and we took it earlier, it's going down Lampton key.
You're not targeting one specific mp.
That's what I was trying to understand. Okay.
But I think, I think I get your point. Thank
You. Yeah. Ms. Nala, did
you want a question or you Okay,
Thanks Mr. Chair.
Um, what I'd like to say is, um, uh,
thank you very much for coming.
It takes a lot of courage to come
and stand, like sit in front of us all
and on public and that.
So I want to thank you for that. Thank,
and I also thank you for emphasizing, um, your views that,
that some parts of the, um,
changes are all defined. So thank you.
Thank you. Alright. Very good.
Hey, thank you for your time this morning. Cheers.
Thank you. Right now, um, we are moving on.
Uh, we've got Ms. Lee, is it?
Yeah. Ms. Lee, uh, uh, Ms. Lee, are you there?
Oh, slipped ahead a bit.
Are you there with us? Oh, good morning.
Good, good morning. Hey, now we
Were talking to us just in the,
in the waiting screen for joining.
Yeah, no, no, no problem at all.
Hey, we've got five minutes with you.
Cool, thanks. Um, uh, I'm just here to really, um, yeah,
Hilda, I'm Dne, I live in Whakatane
in the East Coast electorate.
I just wanna sort of reiterate what some of the things I,
and expand on some of the things I said in my submission.
Um, my submission basically was, I agree with the intent
of the bill in terms of people's privacy
and their residential homes needing
to have more protection around it.
Um, but I just think it's really poorly crushed
and badly written legislation.
And I did catch the end of the last submitter.
Um, and very much so agree with, with her sentiments too.
Um, really just,
I've been on both sides of this.
I've worked for mps, um, I've been protested
at at my place of work.
Um, also in my, in my workplace since then, I've been
had my home pitted at home.
I do end what violation feels like.
I also really deeply believe that our right to freedom
of expression and and gathering to, to protest
and demonstrate is so, so important that any legislation
that we're putting in needs to be widely consulted
and needs to have wide ranging review, especially
by the public, which was, um, you know,
also in the regulatory impact statement,
which I couldn't find when I first did my submission,
but have since read, um, along with the IPCA report,
um, review into, uh, public protest and,
and the, the parliamentary review.
So I, I just think I agree that having an offense
with no warning is warning, uh, unworkable
and somewhat ridiculous.
And when, when reading the IPCA, um, report, um,
and the response, the police response to
that actually really upset me because their response was,
well what if the protestors were
ear masks or could just leave?
And I'm like, okay, first of all, there are other ways
to communicate with people.
I mean, how does that pull? And although if they just result
for you to arrest any, uh, there was AOL to be a arresting,
um, which kind of we, we read with the rest of the things
that document kind of fit in with some of the um, I think
overreaching powers of, that the police were seeking.
So I don't think this is good legislation.
I think we need to go back to the drawing board, scrap it,
and do a wider consultation.
I think there are ways and means within other acts to deal
with this particular issue.
And I think also with the, this, the stalking bill
that's coming through, gonna add another, another layer.
So I, I just think it's probably written.
Can we start again and can people have their say please.
Right. Have we finished? We've just given you a moment.
I have. I wanted some question.
Hey boy, thank you for that submission.
Um, slightly different view from
others, so that's very good.
Um, anyone else? Anyone got a question?
No, just to say thank you 'cause it's, Hey, thank you.
Um, if that's very useful actually.
Um, and interesting you've been subject to your, um,
protesting at your own home.
Um, I think just striking the right balance there
is the point that you're making.
Alright. Hey, thank you very much for your time.
Thank you. Now I think we've got, uh,
Bianca, is that right?
From Kai Afin? Is that right?
Good morning. Good morning.
Are you on your own?
Uh, no. Bianca is just joining us now.
Okay, cool. Just two more.
We've got, um, 10 minutes with you.
Wonderful. What a tree. Yeah, I know.
Or just let Bianca join and then I will kick us off.
Okay, I'm here.
Alright, I Koto committee.
I'm here on behalf of Caina aor,
a community care organization that provides marshal
and medic services for protests.
We are based in to Makoto Auckland.
Um, I've been watching a lot
of the oral submissions this morning,
and I'd like to comfortably say that the majority
of submission submitters have been opposition to this bill.
You've heard from community leaders
and technical experts regarding relevant specifics.
Um, I'll provide a small summary of our written statement
and our written submission,
then I'll take time for questions.
Um, our values are around mana, um, being nonviolent,
having integrity, being steadfast, having patience,
being disciplined and strengthened unity.
It is from this principled foundation
that we oppose this bill in its entirety.
We believe this bill is unnecessary undemocratic
and creates significant risks to fundamental freedoms.
Uh, the bill is unnecessary and redundant.
It, um, grants police excessive arbitrary discretion.
It unjustifiably curtails democratic freedoms and shields.
The powerful, um,
the definitions overly broad and unworkable.
It disproportionately harms marginalized communities.
And from this kayana believes that the right
to peaceful protest in a location
where it'll be effective is a cornerstone of our democracy.
Um, so our values of AKA
and Kia being principled
or speaking truth canel us
to speak against this legislation.
We do not. Or is that under other leg rules goes, uh,
addressing far beyond addressing genuine safety concerns.
It creates a d dangerous precedent
that weakened our democracy
and shields the powerful from accountability.
We urge the committee to protect, um,
art's Democrat freedoms and the right to peacefully protest.
I will pass to Bianca
Uhto. Uh,
thank you for the opportunity to speak today.
Uh, I guess I'll just follow up, uh, from what Travis said
by saying that as a pu uh, we
were formed in October, 2023
and since then we have supported over 200 protests, uh,
particularly every single week supporting Palestine pro
protests, but also workers unions.
Um, the tap trans
and rainbow community, as well
as the Maori protest movement, including the ttu,
uh, uh, to
that legislatively does make a reaction, um, particularly
to have happened quite recently
and that there hasn't been, um, the right amount of time
and thought put into this bill.
Uh, there's also the issue of residential, uh, properties
and the areas where people will be protesting outside.
And I just wanted to give the example of, um,
obviously I've heard some
of the other submitters this morning talking about
embassies, but there is also, um, you know,
mixed business residential properties.
And one example could be, uh, if someone was going
to protest a liquor license
and that also happens to be a residential address
or if there is a private marina
development, uh, happening.
And that also includes the residential address of one
of those, uh, directors.
So I think that it, um, problematic to the lack of warning
that people will also be given.
So our purpose out there on the streets
and supporting protests is mainly around deescalation.
And I see if the police are given more powers
and particularly above what is already, you know,
the the legal framework that is in place, uh, to be able to,
um, you know, deal with intimidation, stalking, harassment,
um, and so on, is that
it's problematic in the sense that if someone goes
to a residential address
and doesn't know that they're not gonna give,
be given a warning before arrest
and there are multiple people present
and an arrest does happen, that's a significant escalation
to the peaceful protest
that will be happening in that location.
Um, so yeah, I just wanted to reaffirm what, uh,
Travis said and, um,
and welcome any questions kilda? Alright.
First question and thank you for
that first question from Dr. Nan.
Cool. Um, thank you Bianca,
and thank you Trav for your submission.
I wanted, I, I was wondering if you wouldn't mind speak a
bit more, I know we've heard this
as a running theme in terms of shielding the powerful,
and I'm particularly drawn to the Parliament.
It says, you know, for marginalized communities
and groups, without access to political lobbyists
or media platforms, demonstration is the last resort
to demand accountability.
And what does that mean in terms for you in terms of equity,
but also in terms of democracy and freedom of expression?
Yeah, KDA, KDA Lawrence, it's a really good question.
And some of the process section that we've, um,
seen happen, uh, over the last couple
of years in particular, um,
we have seen marginalized communities seeing, um, you know,
just section that is coming from political
and in looking examples, I just wanna give the of
sanctions for example.
Um, which happened within two weeks or the, uh,
or the, um, you know, the, the visas that were offered, uh,
to people in Ukraine, which happened very quickly.
And so I've seen people lobbying the government in all kinds
of ways and including protest, uh,
outside residential addresses, which is, uh, legal
and is also a peaceful protest.
And it is a case of, um, people's voices not being heard
and a regular
and sustained effort, uh, to be able to get the attention
or any kind of response from those, um,
who have the political power to, um, you know,
to either just acknowledge that they're being heard, um,
but also to make change.
And so, um, yeah, I think it's been
an extremely important way for people to feel like, um,
they are holding those to, um, in power to account.
And that this bill is really a knee jerk re reaction
to someone feeling uncomfortable.
And the reality is, is that if you are a person in position
and a position, um, should be able to answer,
and this position just feels like a very rushed, uh,
knee jerk response
that will have a real chilling effect in terms
of people not giving a wa not being given a warning.
Okay. I've got a question from Ms. Cle,
Uh, Kira.
So can I ask you please, um, in terms of, uh,
these powerful people that you guys allude to,
are they human beings as well?
I would assume they're people, are human beings
As a human being, do they have maybe even like 1% right
to privacy or forget about them, their family?
Does their family have a right to privacy
Or Exist?
Yeah, I think, I think everybody has the right to, uh,
obviously to feel safe, um,
and to have, uh, privacy as well.
But a peaceful protest, which is, you know,
within the pounds of the law and is not disrupting
or harming anybody, um, you know, is, is legitimate way
of protesting and a really fundamental part of a healthy
Bianca. So Bianca,
if you were to read a new offense that we want
to enact, it says they commit an offense if they continue
to engage in demonstration that is, um, disruptive.
So not peaceful, but disruptive. Bianca, um,
The purpose of protest is to disrupt,
Disrupt what?
Disrupt at 4:00 AM in the morning with pots and pans
or disrupt a thought process.
What, what's the disruptive nature
that you are referring to?
Because I believe I have, I have organized protests
with 10,000 people when I was younger,
but I never would go in front of someone's home
at 4:00 AM in the morning with pots and pan
Purpose of 10,000 people. An occupation?
Pardon? The ation of Lebanon. Oh, I organize road tests.
Was it disruptive? Never go.
I would never go in front of someone's home
at 4:00 AM in the morning with pots and pans. Bianca,
Can we, alright, now I've got a,
a question from Ms. Walters. Um, thank you. Um,
I, I just, I'd just like to actually just respond, um,
to the time that that question was asked in
and just, um, also say that it's really, um, yeah,
unprofessional of you to kind of assume that maybe
that's something that I've done
or that I believe it's a good
Idea. I didn't say you,
I'm talking about the others
that we are legislating about.
I'm pretty sure you are pretty peaceful.
The way you come across is peaceful.
I'm talking about the ones that are not you,
the others. That's why we have,
They're illegal already.
It's illegal. Let's just go to Ms.
Thank you both for your submission
and just given your role,
you'd obviously have frequent interaction with the police
who do have a set of existing powers, including arrest
for breach of the peace, including disorderly conduct,
including a lot of noise related offenses
that they can also arrest for, um,
or for breach of the peace.
Uh, I guess my question is, given your interactions
with the police, what are they saying
to you about whether they're able
to manage situations at the moment?
Is there a need from this given you're at
protests every week at the moment?
Uh, just to, um, answer that, uh, in terms of kaino,
we don't have direct, um, communication with the police.
So if there is a protest
and the organizer of that protest
will generally have a police liaison.
Uh, so we are not in direct communication, uh,
with the police in any kind of a way.
In terms of the most recent protests
outside a resident residential address, the feedback
that I got was that the, uh, protestors were advised
by the police, um, to lower noise to leave
by a certain time, all of which was agreed
to and carried out.
Um, but yeah,
we haven't had any direct communication from the police on
that and we certain we certainly haven't seen in terms
of the amount of time that we've been on the ground
and need for this kind of, um, extreme repression.
Um, in my opinion, where you're driving in
for a organize with the outside private residence
or whether it's a joint, um, residence business situation
and embassy, um, at the Governor General's residence.
Um, you know, it's just so broad
and sweeping that it's going to, um, you know,
really prohibit some basic
and fundamental, um, human rights
and, uh, ability
to practice our democratic right to protest.
Alright. Hey, thank you
for your submission this morning, uh, to both of you.
Um, interesting submission, right?
We will now go to, um, to Bruce.
Sorry, go to Bruce. Bruce, sorry Bruce.
Uh, I just gotta try
and find your, maybe you're on the next page.
Oh, Bruce King, Mr. King.
Mr. King, if you're available, um, please join us.
Hello, Mr. King.
Uh, nice that you've joined us,
and thank you for coming on a little bit early.
Uh, we've got five minutes with you.
Oh, you're welcome. Uh, thanks.
I I very much appreciate the opportunity
to appear before you.
And, uh, I also think the other contribu
contributors who've given some terrific contributions, um,
I oppose this bill and I support the law
as it currently stands.
Um, currently the law on assembling
outside homes is essentially the same for everyone.
Um, both for those on the inside of the house
and for those on the outside.
Uh,
sorry, I do have a video, I think hopefully.
Okay. Uh, it's not working, but nevermind.
Um, so the only exceptions to that, uh,
where the protest is political,
and in that case the protestors are given equal attitude
as it, this is as it should be.
Uh, but this bill seek to turn that on its head, uh,
firstly by creating a cohort of people who are given equal,
right, who are given extra rights over everyone else,
namely politicians.
I'm, I'm sorry to say that.
And secondly, by making protests that is political,
more exposed to criminal prosecution than any other type
of protest or assembly.
Uh, in doing so, it challenges some of the
fundamental constitutional principles
and values of New Zealand law.
If you look on the website of the legislation design
and advisory committee, which is the main advisory body
for this government, the very first principle they point
to is called the rule of law, where everyone is equal
before the law and everyone is subject to it.
And particular scrutiny is given
that the government itself is subject to the law.
Uh, so it definitely, definitely should not be a carve out
for politicians, which what this,
which is what this bill does.
And the second fundamental value, of course,
is our democratic right to express political opinions.
Uh, so this bill has been wrongly conceived
and the legislative process has been rushed and poor,
and also on a gut feeling level, the bill also appears
self-serving and elitist politicians are already privileged.
If the broader intent of this bill is to protect
the quiet enjoyment of the home,
then you should instead be working hard for those
who are most deprived of that, right?
Particularly homeless people. Thank you.
Hey, thank you Mr. King.
I've got a, um, question from Mr. Bates.
Thanks, Mr. Chair. Um, thanks Mr. King.
Uh, if you think I'm often home, then I,
I'm not sure you entirely understand the role
of a member of Parliament.
I'm hardly ever there. I think the key, uh, for this piece
of legislation is about the quiet enjoyment, particularly
for our family and our children.
I'm interested in your explanation
around why our family members
and our children should be subjected to some of the, uh,
types of protests that presenters to the hearings we've had,
have suggested are appropriate, um, during the course of,
uh, the hearings we've had on this
proposed piece of legislation.
Well, the current law is the same for everyone.
So, um, if a particular conduct is offensive
in this, in protests in front of a politician's house,
then it's the same for a protest in front
of anyone's house of any sort.
So you are saying it's appropriate for us to just wait
and see if the threats protestors have made around the sort
of language they would use around, for example, my kids, um,
should just be, we should wait and see if they do it
and you know what the harm is later
or don't you think it's appropriate
that we actually have a bill that says that's not okay.
You can come, you can protest outside my office.
You can have me on as a politician when I walk down the
street, but you can't come and stand outside my house
and shout huge, you know, really bad language, uh,
when the kids are playing on the tramp.
Now, what this bill does is specifically forbid that
for political protests, if someone has another sort
of protest and do the same conduct outside your house,
this bill doesn't have anything to say on
that, and I think that's wrong.
So do you think we should extend it to include that?
No, I think the, well, I I think you should, uh,
carefully look at, at, uh, the current law
and, uh, take a step back
and if there's something that really needs change, you, I,
I'm, I'm not really convinced
by your example. I, I, I don't know.
We'll go back and listen to the earlier submitters.
Okay, now I've got Dr. Nan.
Thank you. I'm just gonna follow up on that question.
Do you think that some of the more egregious examples
that have been given by the select committee are already
covered under existing legislation
Section four?
Uh, that, that's a detailed question
and, um, it depends on the specific, so
I really can't answer that.
My objection to this bill is that it is specific
to political protests and to politicians.
That is my objection to it.
Examples, whether egregious
or not, um, the,
the law should apply equally for all people, not, not just,
uh, cotton will for politicians.
So, Mr. Mr. King, just a little bit of disquiet
because, um, not everyone agrees with your session.
It's only targeted political.
Why do you, can you just, why do you think
that speak there about why you say that statement?
Sorry, I should have picked,
Uh, it's most obvious in the report
that birthed it from the IPCA.
You're familiar with that? Of course. Yeah.
But it's what's in the bill though, isn't it?
What's in the bill? Where, what,
where do you get your reference outta the
bill to make that decision?
Okay. It's only political protests so that the way
that's dressed up is by
introducing a new term called demonstrations
and giving a demonstrate
and giving a definition of demonstrations
that makes it clear that it's only political protests
and it doesn't, it's not other sorts of projects.
So in the bill that as the demonstrate.
Okay. Alright. Hey, thank you for Michelle
and very help that we have people like you come
on and give us their views.
So I really appreciate that this morning. Thank
You. Thank you. I appreciate it.
Right now we've got, um, is it Carolyn?
Uh, er is that who's next call? Yes, if you there.
Oh, good. Good morning. How are you?
Good morning. Yes. Thank you
For, we've got five minutes with you,
so looking forward to hearing from you.
Sure. Uh, yes.
So thank you for allowing me to speak on this bill.
Uh, which I consider an egregious retaliation on us,
the people, um, using our collective voices.
Um, so it's become clearer to me over the years
and I would stretch to say the rest of our country,
that the government as a whole, uh, that we,
the people put in place now act not in the interest of us,
but in the interest of yourselves,
the elites and the politicians.
I say that this uh, bill is pretty shambolic.
It's unvetted, it's vague.
It's a perfect example of what I've just mentioned.
Um, this proposal is a mockery
of our basic rights to protest.
It's a mockery and a poorly veiled grasp
to silence us the people this facade serves
to halt our ability to demand our rights,
to protect our wana and our children.
It's a bill that seeks to quiet us.
It strips us of our most crucial right, which is to speak.
It strips us of our right together.
It strips us of our right to tell you
what you must do without I'm more I than am I don't
that you guys are, you know, incompetent.
I believe that you are at least comp at least competent
in matters of intent.
I've watched politicians, um, sell New Zealand time
and time and time again, sell our our assets to overseas,
to big to uh, big tobacco America.
There are more and more bills proposed like this one
and often passed that do nothing
but take the mals, uh, take food.
It's about money to the hand millionaires and politicians.
Our families are struggling billions of money now.
Billions of dollars going into the hands of people
who already have enough time and time again.
We see bills proposed that no one asked for,
and yet we are very clear about what we want
and we are not listened to.
This bill is a blatant retaliation for those
who have an obligation, sorry, from those
who have an obligation to act in our best interests.
And yet no one's acting.
It is proof that you guys wish to have the ultimate freedom
to build what you want, do what you want,
and for us to be quiet and sworn happening.
Want pro to end then you want us to stop against,
to shout about this Bill is an exact example
of the fact that you guys have forgotten you work for us.
If you have questions, I'm happy to answer.
Right. Thank you. Thank you very much for your submission.
Um, right. Members, any questions?
No, I don't think we have, but hey, thank you Mr.
Eor for your contribution this morning. I appreciate that.
You're welcome. Right now, I think, uh, last submitted, uh,
before we have a break, uh, Mr. Paul, is that
Yes, exactly right. Thank
you very much.
Now we've got, um, 10 minutes for 30
and we're perfectly on time
And I'm conscious that I'm the last thing sitting
between you and a sandwich.
Oh, well, earned sandwich.
Um, I'd like to say that I've listened
to all the submissions this morning
and I really tar Toko the Civil Liberties New Zealand
Council of Civil Liberties and the Law Commission, uh, Mr.
Hare from the Law Commission was excellent.
So, Koto, Mr. Bailey committee members
and thank you for the opportunity to appear before you.
My name is Paul Thito
and I'm the Chief Executive of Rights at roa.
We're an independent NGO dedicated to the promotion
and defense of universal human rights
with a special focus on the rights of transgender non-binary
and intersex people.
We absolutely believe
that people must be safe in their homes.
And I I sympathize with the points that, um,
Mr. Bates was making.
We support the protection of privacy and dignity
and we understand the genuine harm
that arises when protest crosses the line into intimidation.
But we oppose this bill in its entirety.
I don't believe it can be fixed.
It is a disproportionate
and unjustified interference with the fundamental freedoms
of expression and assembly,
and it attempts to solve a problem that is already covered
by existing law.
So, Koto, our first core point is
that this bill is unnecessary.
The explanatory note mentions preventing fear
and intimidation, but as our written submission details,
the existing legal framework is already robust.
The Harassment Act, the Crimes Act,
and sexual several sections of the Summary Offenses
Act itself, including sections on disorderly behavior,
intimidation, and proceeding already provide strong tools
to genuine to stop genuine harassment.
Now. And I don't think people should be banging pots
and pans at 4:00 AM on the street,
and I think we can take care of that by maybe bylaws,
council bylaws.
Um, I know is Thomas Paul here today? No, no.
I once had a fascinating conversation with Ms. Paul about
how we shouldn't make any more new criminal offenses
unless they were very serious things.
'cause I wanted to make hate speech to criminal offense.
And I think we really risk criminalizing an activity here
that should, that can is currently already dealt with
and we should take care of the 4:00 AM pots
and pans by a bylaw.
So we will come to the the next point.
Our second point is that the bill is unconstitutionally
vague and dangerous.
It creates an offense
of holding his disruption near a residence
that causes unreasonable disruption.
I don't need to go through my next point
because it was, it's been taken out
by many submitters this morning.
Where is near what is near, you know,
the abortion safe zones?
Yeah. So at a, at a start, this must define
what near is now.
Unreasonable disrupt disruption is also not defined.
How is a police officer in the moment
to judge if a protest is unreasonably disruptive
or just effectively disruptive?
Because that's what protest is. It's inherently disruptive.
It's an actual thing which is inherently disruptive.
So in this vagueness is made worse by the men's rea.
The mental standard required the bill criminalizes a person
if they knew or ought to have known their actions
were causing disruption.
This is a negligence test.
It criminalizes people
for peacefully exercising their rights based on a failure
to predict how the protest might be perceived
by an occupant or a police officer.
So that is why I think you need to have the warning test
that you're def if you're gonna pass this bill,
which I really hope you don't, it must have some sort
of warning with two warnings or three warnings test.
But to stop someone becoming a criminal
and having a criminal record unnecessarily worse,
it invites arbitrary and discriminatory enforcement.
And this is our third and probably our main point.
Given my stakeholders, we know from all available evidence
that vague discretionary offenses are not applied equally.
They're most often used against those
who are already marginalized Maori Pacifica human rights
activists and working class communities.
This is of direct concerns to rights at Aurora,
the communities we advocate for transgender
and rainbow people often have no institutional power
and must rely on uncomfortable public protests
to have their rights recognized.
This bill provides a tool that could be weaponized
to silence them based on the subjective distress of those
who would simply disagree with their existence.
Kota, this brings me my fourth to our fourth
and last point, the Democratic state stake.
Now, I'm gonna actually just say we are not right to,
Aurora is not a free speech absolutist.
We advocate for the regulation of speech
that causes profound evidence harm.
So in our submissions on other matters,
we consistently argue for four main carve outs
to free expression, incitement to violence.
I incitement to violence definition hate speech.
I'm very keen on defamation laws
and the regulation of algorithms that amplify that hate,
which is the new kind of hate speech.
Now, peaceful nonviolent protest does not fall into any
of these categories, and we must be deeply cautious about
allowing a subjective standard of distress to become a proxy
for political disagreement.
Now also, I believe
that this bill might not survive an NZ bo a conflict
declaration for the very simple reason
that when NZ Boer was made, the I-C-C-P-R article 17
to the right, to a private life was not transposed
into NZ Boer.
But the right
to peaceful assembly is an NZ Boer under section 16.
So that's a bit of a legal n****e that I think you need
to look at and wasn't mentioned in the, uh,
NZ War Section seven report.
So if this committee is genuinely concerned about targeted
harassment, the solution is not.
And I I say this to you, Mr. Bates,
to a new blunt criminal offense.
The solution is to use the strong laws that we already have.
And, uh, and I agree I don't want people doing pots
and pans at 4:00 AM but I believe a peaceful protest in a
residential area is allowable.
So Koto, our recommendations are simple.
First, reject the creation of this new unnecessary
and rights infringing criminal offense.
Secondly, if any gaps are proven to exist,
direct the ministry to explore non-criminal alternatives
that precisely target harassment
without chilling peaceful process.
In conclusion, this bill seeks to solve a problem of comfort
by creating a crisis for democracy.
The right to protest is not the right to be liked
or is not, is not to be polite.
It's inherently disruptive.
It's the right to be heard even in the leafy suburbs.
A democracy confident in itself must not fear peaceful
descent outside any door.
And we urge you to reject this bill
and I welcome your questions.
Thank you. Very good. Right?
I thought we might have Mr. Bates.
Go for it. Um, Thanks Chair,
and thanks for the, um,
presentation the way you've gone about your submission.
Um, there's been much said in this process about, uh,
protesting being something that has been part of the fabric
of New Zealand society indeed for a long time,
which I entirely accept and appreciate
and has had significant impact on our democracy.
Yep. But like many things protesting in New Zealand has
changed 150 years ago,
you would've never seen those protests occur
outside a politician's house in the front of their children
or their family in the, in the way
that has been talked about now.
No, I agree. So don't you think the the right to protest has
to, um, evolve as protesting has evolved?
I agree that all the, it's it's an inter right con,
this is really an inter right conflict.
It's the right between I-C-C-P-R section Article 17,
which is right to a private life
and NZ Boer, oh my god, I've forgotten it.
It's embarrassing. Yeah. NZ Boer for, um,
freedom of peaceful assembly.
I don't want your families to be
exposed to violence or disruption to their daily lives,
but I believe that we can make that coexist with the right
to peaceful assembly in suburbs
and in in, in residential districts.
And I believe that, that, I don't wanna make the point
that this government is not particularly popular.
Okay? We've got evidence for this.
We've got, we've got, um,
we've got election next year
that that'll be the ultimate evidence.
We've got, um, political pulse.
Now, I, I don't,
I believe the regulatory standards bill was a constitutional
coup deta by other means.
And I stood in front of this committee
and said that now, um, I want the right
to protest in front of the politicians' houses who made
that bill, because I believe that,
and this is the, this is the core, the, sorry,
this is the flip side.
To your point. Legislators have become much
more divisive in the last 100 years.
So if you're gonna say that politic, that
that protesting has become, well the, the flip side is
that you yourselves have become more
decisive in your actions.
Supplementary, uh, I'm not sure I would entirely agree
with that without going down that rabbit hole.
I think coming back to the point about protesters, uhhuh,
a lot of the protestors
who have submitted have essentially said,
look, you should trust us.
We, we, we know where the line is,
but we had protesting outside our office in the last week
and the protesters put a lovely letter under the door
to my staff saying, Hey, go about your mahi.
We are not trying to affect and stop you doing what?
I had communication from my staff saying, this is absurd.
Of course they're affecting it.
People aren't gonna walk in the door for me to help.
So why should we trust
that protestors will stay within the bounds of
what is reasonable without putting a clear line in the sand?
We've got, we've got existing law.
You're making a new offense. Doesn't um, he, sorry, keep
Going. Keep getting slow.
Sorry.
Um, there is,
this is making a new criminal offense of three months.
It's quite a, it's a hefty, it's a hefty fine, hefty thing
for a very vague, what's,
what's effectively is effectively disruptive,
intentionally disruptive,
unreasonably disruptive is the laws
I the current law is working. Okay.
Is it? Well, I believe that then I would like
to see this process be much longer
and instead of having this come from the IPCA to have a more
considered process from this honorable committee,
this has been a bit of a rushed lawmaking.
So the, um, the issue around disruption. Yeah.
And you said protests are naturally
disrupted, but I think you did.
But the, do you have a view
around when something goes over the border,
it crosses the boundary of being post peaceful
and then getting to a point where it's,
and you said about your extreme was when you talked about
the pots and bands at four o'clock.
Yeah. What is, how would you go about
giving anyone, and I presume it needs to be the police Yeah.
Um, jurisdiction around.
And how would you redefine
that if you were drafting this law?
If I was drafting this law, I'm not a lawyer.
Um, I'd define near, I would have warnings.
I'd make it a fine, I would get rid
of the criminal, the criminal element.
Yeah. Okay. I, it's a little bit, it crosses the line
too far in my opinion.
Okay. And what about the near,
because that's a definitional thing that a lot
of people have raised this morning.
Yeah. Do you have a view on that?
Um, Because, uh, can I put, put it to you? Mm-hmm.
If some of us, like we had a very good submission this
morning, uh, um, a gentleman
who protests outside the Russian.
Oh yes, I read that. I saw that
One. And he said in a
sense that he was, I think he was saying
that they were silent protests, they do them regularly
and there's no real issue.
Right. Um, that you could imagine
outside someone's home being not an issue at all.
Whether it's a politician or judge, whatever.
If you've got a different scale where you've got light pots
and pans and getting things thrown
through a window, for instance.
Well that's that. I just wanna,
that's not a protest activity, that's a criminal activity.
If I throw something through a window,
it's clearly covered by
What about the, what about the extreme noise issue?
At what point, how do you, how do you put,
create a framework that in most people's mind
that might be regarded as being absolutely disruptive
and particularly to a family concern
and something that's not.
How would you go about doing it?
I would have a second crack at this bill.
Start over again.
Really it
hasn't enough.
There's been a trend recently.
I have noticed in parliament to the quality
of the, the quality of the bills.
And I, I am against the regulatory standards bill.
Um, I don't think this is, I can't say I don't think
this is a very good law
and we shouldn't even be debating it.
We should start with a better draft law. Okay.
And I would, that's what I would say to the committee.
Alright. Hey, well thank you and thank you.
We are in a situation we having to look at. Thank you.
So thank you very much. Sandwiches.
Thanks for coming in person too, by the way. Its always,
And so Talking about Alright members, um, we are going
to break until 1:00 PM
and then we've obviously got more submissions after that.
So I'm gonna adjourn the meeting
until 1:00 PM and thank you everyone.
If you're listening until all the submission.